979-8-3503-9216-6/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE  
 
 
 
Study of Basic Concepts in the Context of Process 
Management and Strategies Based on Big Data 
Bogdan Danov, Daniela Gotseva 
Department of Computer Systems, Faculty of Computer Systems and Technologies 
Technical University of Sofia 
8 Kliment Ohridski blvd., 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria 
b.danov@tu-sofia.bg, dgoceva@tu-sofia.bg 
 
Abstract – Big Data is both an advantage and a challenge due 
to the explosive increase in the volume of large data sets. Big 
Data analysis derives knowledge to improve business processes 
and can be critical in decision making. However, for this 
purpose, the right strategies need to be implemented. This 
document provides an overview of the key concepts, issues and 
challenges in integrating big data with business processes. 
Keywords – Big Data; Massive Datasets; Big Data 
Challenges; Business Processes; Process Model. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
 The huge arrays of data, the diverse and complex sets of 
digital information, the volume of which is constantly 
increasing and exerting an ever-increasing influence in the 
modern world, are usually referred to by the term Big Data.
 Usually, the arrays of information defined by this term are 
characterized by difficulties in storing, analyzing and 
visualizing for further processes or results [1], among their 
other characteristics are high dimensionality and large 
sample size [2]. 
 The authorship of this term is attributed to two of the 
researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center, that's 
according to John Sprague, deputy chief information officer 
for technology, data and innovation at NASA headquarters 
[3]. In his words he said, they were describing a data set too 
large for a desktop computer to handle. 
 Another person could also be named as the author of the 
term - Doug Laney, from Gartner, who defined the three 
main characteristics of big data - the so-called. three V's. 
 Some authors call the emergence of big data a revolution, 
because due to the limited capacity of traditional 
technologies, companies cannot store all their archives for 
long periods of time, nor can they effectively manage huge 
data sets [4].  
 It is important to emphasize that Big Data is experiencing 
remarkable growth thanks to the rapid development of 
mobile data, cloud services, machine learning and the IoT 
industry. 
 For example, thanks to the constant accumulation and 
generation of information, the volume of data worldwide is 
expected to reach over 180 zettabytes by 2025. [5]. 
 The volume and variety of available data is increasing at 
a rapid pace. The reason for this is the massive collection of 
information from various devices, including: 
• 
mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets, etc.; 
• 
Internet of things – cheap and numerous devices 
that collect and transmit data; 
• 
generated software log files; 
• 
fixed and mobile cameras; 
• 
RFID readers; 
• 
wireless sensor networks collecting data from 
various sensors. 
 
Fig. 1. Volume of data/information created, captured, copied, and 
consumed worldwide from 2010 to 2020, with forecasts from 
2021 to 2025. Taken from [5] 
 
All this leads to huge volumes of data that can be used for 
various purposes, such as: 
• 
data analysis – such as discovering patterns and 
trends in data; 
• 
• machine learning, involving the development of 
models that can predict future events; 
• 
artificial intelligence – systems that could think and 
act independently. 
 
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF BIG DATA 
 
 The three key characteristics of Big Data – Volume, 
Variety and Velocity, also known as the three Vs of Big 
Data, as already mentioned were first introduced by Gartner 
in 2001. 
 Some authors [7,8] expand these three concepts to five (or 
more), adding to the definition two more characteristics - 
value and credibility of big data; The V's of big data: 
• 
Volume - The main characteristic of big data is its 
enormous size. This refers to the massive amount 
of information generated continuously by social 
media, IoT devices, transaction records and more. 
• 
Velocity - Nowadays, information is often created 
in or near real time. This also requires that the data 
be processed, accessed and analyzed at the same 
speed for it to be useful. 
2024 12th International Scientific Conference on Computer Science (COMSCI) | 979-8-3503-9216-6/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/COMSCI63166.2024.10778493
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
• 
Variety - Big data is varied in nature. They come 
from multiple sources and can be in different 
formats: 
- 
Structured - organized in tables or databases, 
with a fixed structure; 
- 
Unstructured – unorganized, without a fixed 
structure; 
- 
Semi-structured – partly organized, with some 
elements of structure. 
 
Fig. 2. The five "V's" of big data. Taken from [6] 
• 
Veracity - Big data is not always good quality. 
They can be difficult to work with and analyze, 
contain errors and inaccuracies, and lack important 
data. High data reliability is essential to the success 
of many companies and organizations. 
• 
Value - Big data is only valuable if it is useful for 
business. The goal is to turn vast amounts of data 
into meaningful information that can be used for 
strategic decisions, uncover new market trends, 
customer needs and potential sources of revenue. 
To generate new ideas for products, services and 
business models. 
 As some authors point out [9], big data analysis would 
definitely 
lead 
to 
valuable 
knowledge 
for 
many 
organizations and help to continuously improve business 
processes, which is a challenging task [10]. 
 
III. BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT 
 
 Looking at the BPM (Business Process Management) 
lifecycle, it is probably one of the best options to delve into 
its terminology and characteristics. Multiple approaches and 
methods to deal with different aspects of business processes 
are proposed by different researchers. 
 It is important to point out that Business Process 
Management (BPM) is not a one-time event, but is in fact a 
process in itself – a continuous one at that. Its scope includes 
design, analysis, monitoring and optimization of work 
processes in organizations. 
It is divided into six phases [11] (Fig 3.): 
Phase 1 – process identification: 
• 
defining the scope: the aim is to clarify which 
business processes BPM covers; 
• 
scoping: a precise definition of the specific process 
is needed; 
• 
determining KPIs and Targets: identify key 
performance indicators (KPIs) and targets that will 
be measured to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
process.  
Phase 2 – discovery of the processes: 
• 
creating an "as-is" model: through a suitable 
modeling language (BPMN, UML, etc.); 
• 
gathering information: through observation and 
analysis of documents; 
• 
definition of roles and responsibilities: it is 
necessary to accurately distinguish the roles and 
competences of the participants in the process. 
Phase 3 – process analysis: 
• 
problem detection: for this purpose, qualitative and 
quantitative analysis are applied to detect 
problems; 
• 
cause analysis: clarifying the specific causes of 
problems; 
• 
• impact assessment: performed by evaluating the 
potential benefits of process optimization. 
Phase 4 – process redesign: 
• 
developing a model: it should represent the new 
state of the process; 
• 
selection of redesign methods: the goal is to select 
those that are most appropriate; 
• 
setting new KPIs and targets: Setting new KPIs and 
targets that reflect the desired improvement in 
performance. 
Phase 5 – implementation of the processes: 
• 
developing a plan: it should include all the points 
necessary to implement the new process; 
• 
development of IT solutions: by implementing or 
designing 
IT 
systems 
that 
support 
the 
implementation of the new process; 
• 
testing and validation: performing tests to establish 
the correct functioning of the new process. 
Phase 6 - monitoring and control of processes: 
• 
data collection: how the post-implementation 
process is performed; 
• 
data analysis: to identify deviations and problems 
in the planned execution; 
• 
• taking corrective action: making the necessary 
changes to the process to ensure that it continues to 
meet the objectives and deliver the desired results. 
 
Fig. 3. The Business Process Management Lifecycle. 
Taken from [11] 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 It needs to be pointed out that the six phases of the BPM 
Lifecycle Model are not a linear process. It may be necessary 
to backtrack between phases until the business process is 
optimized. 
  
IV. OPTIMIZATION OF BUSINESS PROCESSES 
 
 The optimization of business processes aims to take new 
measures and decisions based on the obtained results in 
order to achieve real improvements. For this purpose, the 
processes undergo modeling and in-depth analysis. 
However, these actions should not be an end in themselves, 
as applied alone will not lead to a real result, for example, 
process modeling would be ineffective if it is not followed 
by an analysis to evaluate the results. The methods for 
performing modeling and analysis of business processes that 
some authors [12] propose are: 
- 
modeling the process by visualizing the steps in it. 
- 
identifying 
problems 
by 
finding 
inefficient 
processes; 
- 
developing improvements by using process 
optimization analysis. 
 
V. PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT 
 
 After the optimization of business processes, it is 
extremely 
important 
to 
measure 
the 
performance. 
Performance measurement is the process of quantifying the 
results of actions [13].  
 It should be pointed out here that for this purpose it is 
necessary to correctly select the right performance indicators 
in order to obtain maximum benefits. For this purpose a 
Performance Measurement System (PMS) can be used. PMS  
is a system that integrates activities at different levels. It 
consists of a set of performance indicators (PI) that indicate 
the degree of success with which the objectives have been 
achieved. Performance indicators can be: individual that 
determine the effectiveness of individual tasks or processes 
or be part of the PMS. Among the most important 
dimensions of performance indicators are quality, time, cost 
and flexibility. 
  
 
VI. BUSINESS PROCESSES AND BIG DATA 
ANALYSIS 
 
 The analysis of business processes (BPM), as already 
mentioned, aims to lead to their optimization. However, 
implementing Big Data into this analysis can make it even 
more effective [14].  
 Through the use of Big Data analysis, knowledge can be 
extracted to improve processes, leading to specific solutions 
and providing a competitive advantage. 
 It should be pointed out here that because they store 
structured data, relational database management systems 
(RDBMS) are unable to cope with the volume, speed and 
variety of Big Data. This is because such data is usually 
semi-structured or unstructured.  
 In addition, RDBMS are known to be expensive to scale, 
which makes them unsuitable for large volumes of data. On 
the other hand - NoSQL databases are more flexible and 
scalable than RDBMS, making them more suitable for Big 
Data. 
  
VII. BENEFITS OF INTEGRATION OF BIG DATA INTO 
PROCESS MANAGEMENT 
 
 Big Data solutions can offer a number of advantages in 
integration is process management. These advantages can be 
categorized into three main groups [15]: increased 
efficiency, better business intelligence and expanded 
capabilities. 
 Increased efficiency includes optimizing business 
processes through procurement, product development, 
manufacturing, 
distribution, 
marketing, 
pricing, 
merchandising, sales, human resource management. This in 
turn leads to more optimized and successful decision making 
that is based on data and analytics. 
 Better 
business 
information 
is 
characterized 
by 
transparency by providing access to data for stakeholders. 
What's more, this data is detailed as a result of being 
received in real time. Their analysis and segmentation could 
serve to personalize the actions to be taken, as well as to 
automate processes for better efficiency. This would also 
lead to the development of new models – products, services 
and business models. 
 Advanced 
capabilities 
can 
come 
both 
from 
recommendation systems through which offers can be 
personalized and from sentiment analysis – e.g. from social 
media. Similar capabilities also include risk modeling for 
financial operations and fraud detection. Several types of 
analysis can also be used – for churn, social graph, customer 
experience. Among the extended advantages of the 
implementation of Big Data solutions in process 
management can also be mentioned network monitoring to 
detect problems or the possibility of applying them in new 
research and development. 
 
VIII. STRATEGIES BASED ON BIG DATA 
 
 After integrating Big Data into the process, organizations 
must determine which strategy is best suited to their needs. 
The choice of strategy depends on the needs of the 
organization and the characteristics of the data [16]. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Degree of infrastructure integration of the four 
presented Big Data strategies. Taken from [16] 
 
 One possible strategy would be to continue using 
traditional 
relational 
database 
management 
systems 
(RDBMS). An advantage of such a choice is that it is based 
on well-known technologies and no additional integration 
will be required. Such an approach would not be suitable for 
processing the huge amount of data typical of Big Data.
 Another possible strategy would be to use Big Data 
Analytics as a Service (BDAaaS). Such a step means the use 
of cloud-based Big Data analysis tools, which may require 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the use of additional software to connect the company's data 
to the cloud service. 
 Another strategy is to use MapReduce and Distributed 
File Systems (DFS), which however requires more 
significant revision and integration of entirely new software 
alongside existing applications. 
  It is also possible to take a hybrid approach, combining 
elements of the strategies listed so far. Such a measure 
would include, on the one hand, the integration of Big Data 
technologies, but with the use of existing technological 
solutions. 
 Of course, these four strategies for Big Data analysis with 
varying degrees of integration with an existing IT system are 
not the only options, and a number of variations and 
combinations are possible. 
 
IX. CONCLUSION 
 
 Choosing the right big data strategy can be critical. This 
problem will become more significant in view of the ever-
increasing volume of information, which makes efficient 
data processing a challenge. This paper provides an 
overview of key concepts, issues and challenges in the 
context of big data-based process management and 
strategies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented in the paper is supported by research 
grant 242ПД0034-09 financed by the Research and 
Development Sector of TU-Sofia. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
S. Sagiroglu, D. Sinanc, “Big data: A review”, International 
Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems 
(CTS), San Diego, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 42-47 
[2] 
 J. Fan, F. Han, H. Liu, “Challenges of Big Data analysis”, 
National Science Review, vol. 1, 2, June 2014, pp. 293–314 
[3] 
Small Steps, Giant Leaps: Episode 5, Big Data, available 
online at: https://www.nasa.gov/podcasts/small-steps-giant-
leaps/small-steps-giant-leaps-episode-5-big-data/ 
[4] 
A. Oussous, F. Benjelloun, A. A. Lahcen, S. Belfkih, "Big 
Data technologies: A survey", Journal of King Saud 
University - Computer and Information Sciences, vol. 30, 4, 
2018, pp. 431-448 [4] What is Big Data Analytics?, 
available online at: https://www.ibm.com/topics/big-data-
analytics 
[5] 
Volume of data/information created, captured, copied, and 
consumed worldwide from 2010 to 2020, with forecasts from 
2021 
to 
2025 
, 
available 
online 
at: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-
created 
[6] 
Enhancing Active Transportation and Demand Management 
(ATDM) with Advanced and Emerging Technologies and 
Data Sources - Chapter 5. Design and Deployment Elements 
and Methods - FHWA Office of Operations, available online 
at:https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/fhwahop19010/ch5.
htm 
[7] 
Big Data Defined: Examples and Benefits, available online 
at: https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-big-data#section-
3 
[8] 
What is Big Data Analytics?, available online at: 
https://www.ibm.com/topics/big-data-analytics 
 
[9] 
T. -M. Choi, H. K. Chan and X. Yue, "Recent Development 
in Big Data Analytics for Business Operations and Risk 
Management," in IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 47, 
no. 1, pp. 81-92, Jan. 2017 
[10] A. Vera-Baquero, R. Colomo-Palacios and O. Molloy, 
"Business Process Analytics Using a Big Data Approach," in 
IT Professional, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 29-35, Nov.-Dec. 2013 
[11] B.Wurm, T.Grisold, J.Mendling, J.vom Brocke, "Business 
Process Management and Routine Dynamics", In Handbook 
of Routine Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, 2020 
[12] K. Vergidis, A. Tiwari, B. Majeed, "Business Process Analysis 
and Optimization: Beyond Reengineering," in IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C 
(Applications and Reviews), vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 69-82, Jan. 
2008, doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2007.905812 
[13] L. M. Glavan, "Understanding Process Performance 
Measurement Systems", Business Systems Research, 2011, 
2, 25-38, 10.2478/v10305-012-0014-0 
[14] A. Hassani, S. A. Gahnouchi, "A framework for Business 
Process Data Management based on Big Data Approach", 
          Procedia Computer Science, Volume 121, 2017, Pages 740-
747, 
ISSN 
1877-0509, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2017.11.096 
[15] A. C. L. Ziora, "The Role of Big Data Solutions in the 
Management of Organizations. Review of Selected Practical 
Examples", Procedia Computer Science, Volume 65, 2015, 
Pages 
1006-1012, 
ISSN 
1877-0509, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.059. 
[16]  K. Ebner, T. Bühnen, N. Urbach, "Think Big with Big Data: 
Identifying Suitable Big Data Strategies in Corporate 
Environments," 2014, 47th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2014, pp. 3748-
3757, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2014.466. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

