A Framework for Process Management in Service 
Oriented Virtual Organizations
Mohammad H. Danesh, Bijan Raahemi, Mohammad A. Kamali 
IBM Center for Business Analytics and Performance Management 
Telfer School of Management, University of Ottawa 
55 Laurier Ave, E. Ottawa, ON.  K1N 6N5 Canada 
{mahma023, braahemi, skama043}@uottawa.ca
Abstract—Virtual Organization (VO) is a network of autonomous 
organizations sharing their competitive advantage to address a 
specific business opportunity. Due to their autonomous and 
interdependent nature, management of collaboration among such 
organizations is a challenging task.  In this paper, we present a 
framework for process management in service oriented virtual 
organizations.  We propose 6 layers for the framework with 
multiple components within each layer.  In designing the 
components of the framework, standard reference architecture 
such as Open-EDI reference model and the S3 service oriented 
architecture, as well as best practices such as ITIL V3 and 
PMBOK are used. Further, we present a distributed SOA 
infrastructure that facilitates peer-to-peer collaboration between 
organizations in a virtual organization. The infrastructure is 
based on creating specific service zone for each participating 
organization to build a virtual ESB. Compared to collaborative 
environment in networked organization usually supported by 
computer networks, the loose coupling of services, and the 
autonomous characteristics of service oriented architecture make 
it one the best approaches for implementing virtual organization.  
Keywords-Virtual Organization; Service Oriented Architecture; 
Collaborative Process Management; Enterprise Service Bus 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Participation in inter organizational collaboration is 
inevitable in today’s business environments, especially when 
organizations need to achieve a differentiated competitive 
advantage. This is even more essential if the organization is a 
small or medium size enterprise (SME). Companies are 
increasingly restructuring their process models and software 
infrastructures to facilitate dynamic and flexible environments 
to engage in more complex value exchanges, partnership, and 
business ecosystems [1]. This results in appearance of 
Collaborative Networked Organizations (CNO) and temporary 
gathering of multiple organizations to address a specific 
business opportunity, and eventually, creation of Virtual 
Organizations (VO). 
Computer aided data interchange and software interaction 
between different organizations has been around for a long 
time, and has evolved over time. Several frameworks and 
standards have been developed, especially for Business-to-
Business interactions. Also, there have been studies on agile 
and 
flexible 
communications 
within 
networked 
of 
organizations.  At their early stages, these frameworks were 
mostly relying on data interchange, but as they evolved, they 
also attempted to address business processes between networks 
of organizations [2]. EDI (Electronic Data Interchange), 
RosettaNet, ebXML (Electronic Business using eXtensible 
Markup Language) and SOA (Service Oriented Architecture)
based solutions are examples of such interaction frameworks. 
 In this research, a framework to form and manage VOs 
in a distributed environment based on service oriented 
infrastructure is proposed. The proposed framework enables 
networks of organizations to form virtual workflows based on 
their software infrastructures, and share and monitor their 
performance metrics without the need for a central authority. 
An abstraction layer for services will enable organizations to 
share their designated services with other partners while 
keeping their own core competency private to themselves.  
A. Virtual Organizations 
While 
there 
are 
several 
definitions 
for 
Virtual 
Organizations, there is no definition that draws an exact line for 
VOs. In this paper, a Virtual Organization is considered as a 
dynamic, temporal consortium 
of 
autonomous 
legally 
independent organizations which  corporate with each other to 
attend a business opportunity or cope with a specific need, 
where partners share risks, costs and benefits, and whose 
operation is achieved by a coordinating sharing of skills, 
resources and competencies [3][4]. VOs are classified 
differently based on their characteristics. A common 
classification is based on VO topologies. In [4], three different 
topologies for VOs are discussed: the supply chain topology in 
which partners’ collaboration follows a linear pattern where 
each partner communicates to its upper and lower neighbors; 
the star topology, also called hub and spoke, which has a main 
contractor  acting as the central partner, and the collaboration 
between different partners is arranged predominantly star-like 
between the central partner and other organizations; and 
finally,  the peer-to-peer topology where the partners interact 
with each other with no hierarchy or central control. The VOs 
processes are divided into operational processes and 
management processes. The operational topology describes the 
physical and informational flows needed for the production of 
a product or service while the management topology describes 
the information and control flows of VO guidance process. The 
VO might follow one of the topologies in its operation and 
another one in its management [4]. As for the VOs contracting 
and 
costumer 
relationship, 
VOs 
have 
four 
different 
collaboration patterns. First, the explicit consortium in which 
the client selects and regulates the partners involved and 
follows a star topology managed by consumer itself. The 
second one is the internal consortium which follows a star 
topology but one of the VO partners regulates the 
12
978-1-4577-1127-5/11/$26.00 c⃝2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
communication and handles the contract with the costumer. 
The third solution would be a sub-contracting solution which 
follows a supply chain topology. The final pattern which 
follows the peer-to-peer topology is a partnership in which all 
partners are responsible for a legal contract, and interact with 
the costumer directly. In this case, sometimes a legal entity is 
formed using the partnership agreement [5]. 
B. Management  of Virtual Organization  
VO management denotes the organization, allocation and 
coordination of resources and their activities, as well as their 
inter-organizational dependencies to achieve the objectives 
within the required time, cost and quality frame [4]. As VOs 
aggregate several autonomous partners, and operate in a highly 
dynamic and temporal environment, their management is 
complex, and also critical to the success of VOs. Efficient VO 
management faces challenges such as temporality in its nature, 
distributed operation between different business partners, need 
of adoption to fast changing environment which may cause 
restructuring 
in 
management 
approach 
or 
even 
VO  
configuration. In order to support dynamic and agile 
management within the VO climate, real-time actions, and 
consequently, efficient performance management with reliable 
real-time indicators are required [4]. Four different approaches 
for VO management are identified. First, managing VO as a 
project using Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK) [6] which defines a project as “a temporary effort to 
create a unique product or service”. A VO then fits in 
PMBOKs definition of a project. However, some argue that a 
VO management is much more complicated than a project 
since multiple organizations are involved, and VO creation 
requires initial preparation and continuous negotiation. The 
second approach is to define and employ decision protocols 
and mechanisms to manage VOs. This approach usually lacks 
the guidelines and supporting methodologies for management 
activities. The third approach is to use PMBOK and other 
related project management frameworks as a reference model 
for VO management. Finally, the fourth approach is based on 
collaborative discussions between different VO partners [3] 
[4]. VOs have a wide range of characteristics with respect to 
their structure, time span, lifecycle and behavior. Therefore, it 
is extremely difficult to define a one-size-fits-all model 
covering all the identified requirements of VO management. 
As such, the focus in VO management is mainly on governance 
and management services [7]. Common organizations spend 
only a small fraction of their lifetime in the creation and 
dissolution stages, whereas in many varieties of CNOs these 
two phases are complex and take up considerable efforts. Every 
CNO has four stages in its lifecycle, namely Creation, 
Operation, Evolution and Inheritance [8]. VO management 
focuses on the operation and evolution stages of the lifecycle 
which itself is divided to five phases including Initiation, 
Operation, Collaboration, Evolution and Dissolution.  The 
ECOLEAD project has further elaborated VO management 
services as main components for management of virtual 
organization [9]. 
C. Service Oriented Archite ture (SOA) 
SOA is more than just a flexible new technology but an 
IT paradigm that facilitate agility and reusability in 
organizations. From a manger’s point of view “SOA is a 
journey that promises to reduce lifetime cost of the application 
portfolio, maximize Return on Investment (ROI) in both 
application and technology resources, and reduces lead times in 
delivering solutions to the business” [10].  From a business 
executive’s point of view “SOA is a set of services that can be 
exposed to their customers, partners and different parts of the 
organization” [10]. From an information systems architect’s 
point of view “SOA is a means to create dynamic, highly 
configurable and collaborative applications built for change 
which reduces IT complexity and rigidity” [10]. In today’s 
market, enterprises have to respond faster and more efficient to 
shifting market requirements, regulations and customer needs. 
Tight competition is forcing businesses to provide more and 
more services to their customers to keep them satisfied. To 
accomplish this, enterprises need to have a palette of atomic or 
composite services that can be easily and dynamically 
assembled into business processes [11]. Due to SOAs loose 
coupling, policy driven, composable service architecture; it is 
surely one the most appropriate implementation approaches for 
such dynamic business processes [10]. A combination of a 
SOA and Business Process Management (BPM) approach, 
with the appropriate management focus, will facilitate a faster 
path to IT and business alignment. Although SOA BPM 
approach has known to be successful, failure stories have been 
reported in this area which was mostly caused by a sole web 
service orientation towards SOA implementation [11]. SOA 
principles and best practices need to be used to design services 
in three different layers, and to compose services on those three 
layers to realize dynamic BPM. The first layer is collaborative 
services, which include high level business processes defined 
between enterprises. The second layer is public services which 
are processes inside an enterprise composed of different 
business components and orchestrated properly. Finally, the 
private services which are internal business activities within a 
business component [11].  
II.
THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK FOR  PROCESS 
MANAGEMENT  IN SOVO 
As discussed in the previous section, VOs operate in a 
very dynamic environment. They also need computer networks 
and information systems to facilitate their collaboration while 
maintaining each partner’s independence.  VOs’ operation 
phase is handled through their collaborative business processes, 
and as discussed before, one the best ways to implement and 
manage dynamic business processes is with a SOA approach 
[10]. As such, we   propose a framework and an 
implementation infrastructure for Service Oriented Virtual 
Organization (SOVO) Process Management. The proposed 
framework is based on reference architectures and best 
practices to ensure an effective service oriented process design 
for SOVO. The layering of the framework is based on the 
Open-EDI reference model [12] and the S3 Service Oriented 
Reference Architecture [13]. Detailed descriptions of the 
components of the framework are derived from the best 
practices of ITIL V3 [14] and PMBOK [6]. Figure 1, shows the 
framework and its components in six layers which will be 
discussed further in the following sub-sections. The main 
boxes represent the layers and the small inner boxes indicate 
the components of each layer. 
2011 7th International Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices
13
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
This framework is based on a distributed service oriented 
infrastructure which facilitates distributed management of the 
VO, while keeping the actual organizations and their services 
and processes completely autonomous by using service zones
as an abstraction layer for the organizations services. The 
service zone allows organizations share their collaborative 
services under specific rules and policies defined by the VO 
business processes and service choreography. The zones enable 
VO to manage and orchestrate its services as if it is the actual 
owner, while providing the business partners with complete 
control and autonomy to manage or change their services 
within the boundary of the collaborative policies and zone 
specifications. The VO is virtually the owner of its services and 
can enforce the rules, service choreography and orchestration 
within its domain while the zone gateway ensures 
organizations privacy and security restrictions. More technical 
details of this collaboration pattern will be discussed later.
Figure 1: The SOVO Process Management Framework 
A. Business Value Coordination 
This layer focuses on the business values and motivations 
of the VO formation. It illustrates the business opportunity and 
the values that the VO consortium will gain. The opportunity 
discovery results in a set of business values that will be further 
discussed as Measurable Organizational Values (MOVs) and a 
general business model for the VO. After the business model is 
defined, partner discovery and selection is performed. In an 
ideal service oriented environment this is done by agent based 
semantic oriented service matching using the UDDI registry 
(Universal Description, Discovery and Integration). Further 
research on VO partner search and VO creation phase can be 
found in [15] and [5]. Partner negotiation and contracting í
which value constellation (network of enterprises that jointly 
creates and distributes objects of economic value) modeled by 
e3-Value [16] [17] is the most important part of ití finalizes 
this phase. As part of the value constellation, each partners 
offering and competencies is identified, and their contribution 
in VO value creation is elaborated and modeled. 
B. Business Process Design 
This layer focuses on business process flow and clarifies 
different conditions and dependencies between processes and 
their related conditions. It is also responsible for design and 
correlation of individual services to form efficient healthy 
business processes. The choreography modulation focuses on 
partner collaboration and service interactions. It specifies each 
party’s role and activities, and the sequences of service 
invocation. It serves as an agreement between the participating 
business partners in their collaboration [18]. This step of the 
business process design may even alter some of the partner 
negotiation. As such, some iteration between the two 
components might be necessary. Due to the use of Enterprise 
Service Buses (ESBs) and support of multiple messaging 
patterns in SOA infrastructure, the notion of listening and 
responding to events is embedded and supported which makes 
SOA and event driven architecture (EDA) complementary 
solutions [10]. Therefore, the presented SOVO infrastructure 
(explained in sub-section E) facilitates events specifications 
and their implementation. These events will be described in 
this module, and modeled later using Business Process Model 
and Notation (BPMN) [19]. The information flow is specifying 
data flow between different services in a process. It models 
what to be delivered to whom at what time. A combination of 
Data Flow Diagram (DFD) and BPMN will be used to model 
these interactions. Policy definition in VOs has two aspects, 
first service policy definitions which further qualify capabilities 
of interaction endpoints; simply put, a policy expresses 
anything a service wants the world to know about it other than 
what messages it understands. These policies will be enforced 
by the ESBs and their collaboration [20]. The second aspect is 
the process layer policies which indicate the collaborative 
process rules and policies. They are implemented using 
business rule engines (Business rule engine is further discussed 
in sub-section E). These policies will be modeled using WS-
Policy open standard. The zone specification is focused on how 
each partner of the VO organizes its gateway. It indicates what 
services are shared, and what main policies and security 
restrictions it applies. These specifications are derived from the 
service choreography and policy definition. Finally, the service 
orchestration illustrates service sequences. It uses BPMN to 
model the final process, and derive the corresponding BPEL 
(Business Process Execution Language) according to the 
partner zone specifications.  
C. Performance Measurement System Design 
Before introducing a framework for performance 
measurement, we need to identify the different categories of 
Key 
Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) 
for 
SOVO. The 
ECOLEAD project [21] divides performance indicators in 
CNOs into three different categories: 1) the performance of 
fulfilling the given task and the contributing performance of the 
partners, 2) the performance of the partners’ collaboration, and 
3) the performance of the management approach. In case of a 
service oriented virtual organization, these layers can be 
interpreted as 1) Service Layer KPIs, 2) Services Collaboration 
Performance, and 3) Measureable Organizational Values 
(MOVs). These performance categories can be depicted as 
different layers of a SOVO performance pyramid as shown in 
Figure 2.
The bottom-level performance indicators in a SOVO will 
be used to assess the performance of services provided by a 
specific partner in the collaborative process. These indicators 
are mostly domain specific and must be agreed upon by the 
corresponding partners. These indicators are mainly at 
14
2011 7th International Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
operational level. The mid-level performance indicator is 
Collaboration Performance which is used to measure the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the independent partners’ 
interaction. Meeting the targets in these performance indicators 
enables merging of their processes to accomplish a common 
task in a non-hierarchic way [22]. The collaboration 
performance layer can be considered strategic, whereas the 
value creation in a SOVO can be done only by smooth 
interaction and collaboration among SOVO partners. The top 
level of performance indicators in Figure-3 is employed to 
measure the effectiveness of management approach and the 
strategic level of decision making in SOVO. Considering the 
time restriction and limited resources available, one approach 
to manage SOVOs is the IT project management [3]. Thus, 
using the language of IT project management, the criteria 
indicating the success of SOVO at this level are measureable 
organizational values (MOVs) [23]. MOVs are considered the 
most strategic level of performance indicators as they have the 
strongest ties with the SOVO’s strategy. In fact, the temporal 
and dynamic nature of SOVO substitutes the long-term 
strategic goals and objectives with short-term organizational 
value creation. Balances Score Card (BSC) can be used to 
establish the links among these three layers. The BSC method 
provides a balanced approach by considering non-financial 
metrics (customer, internal business process and learning and 
growth), as well as financial ones. The change in non-financial 
indicators will affect the financial ones in long-term defined by 
mathematical relationship between the two [24]. 
Figure 2: The SOVO Performance Indicators Pyramid 
D. Service Level Management 
This layer is derived from ITIL V3 service level 
management principles [14]. It is a set of processes that are 
responsible for defining and negotiating service level targets, 
objectives and agreements which ensure the performance of 
overall VO services and operations. Service level management 
guarantees service consistency and continual improvement 
which also facilitates better monitoring and quality assurance.  
This layer maps the previously modeled processes and 
performance system design to traceable services, and generates 
manageable service level agreements from them. The value 
target planning focuses on overall service level targets based on 
measurable organizational values defined in the previous sub-
section. The service collaboration requirement specifies service 
interdependencies and their quantitative measurements derived 
from the collaboration performance as mentioned in the 
previous sub-section. These two components follow a top-
down approach for definition of performance threshold, 
whereas, a bottom-up logic is followed for the definition of the 
performance indicators. The service zone describes the 
gateway requirements per each partner participated in the VO. 
It acts as an SLA for the overall policies and rules supporting 
specific partner’s services. The service level requirement 
(SLR) is a set of specifications and requirements for a service, 
based on the business objectives. The main functionalities 
expected from a service are described in SLR and operational 
level agreements (OLA). OLA is an agreement on operational 
support between service provider and its users. The service 
layer KPI boundaries are set in this phase through the SLR and 
OLA, also projected in the Service Layer Agreement (SLA). 
The SLA describes the Service, documents service level 
targets, and specifies the responsibilities of the IT service 
provider and the users. The results of the negotiations and 
performance indicators and agreements are all projected in a 
single SLA document which is the main output of this process, 
and is used for monitoring the service in the future. Further, 
templates and specifications of the component in this layer will 
be provided in the documentation of the framework.  
E. Deployment Artifact and Implementation Infrastructure 
This layer proposes an implementation approach to 
virtual organizations. It consists of a set of components and 
implementation principles for SOVO process deployment and 
monitoring. It also embeds some guidelines for continual 
improvement derived from ITIL, which also provides input to 
the final supervision and governance layer. The following 
components will fulfill their duty more effectively if they run 
on a distributed infrastructure. Thus, we propose a model for a 
distributed service oriented infrastructure which facilitates the 
business process operation, monitoring and management in a 
peer-to-peer VO topology. Depending on the configuration of 
the infrastructure, it can support other topologies such as star 
and supply chain as well. We believe that this approach 
provides faster VO deployment, and enhances peer-to-peer VO 
management and collaboration. The distributed infrastructure is 
based on multiple ESBs collaborating with each other, while 
creating zone gateways to guarantee specific organizational 
rules and policies. 
Figure 3: Virtual ESB Facilitating a Distributed SOA Infrastrcuture 
With this zone approach, organizations have total control 
over what services to share securely and conveniently. It is 
easier to control competitive advantage through zones without 
worrying about complex integration process. Generally, ESBs 
are the enablers of service interaction, and facilitate large scale 
implementation of the SOA principles manageable in a 
heterogeneous world [20] [25]. In addition to providing the 
basic infrastructure for service interactions, the ESB provides a 
set of common patterns for construction of on demand 
applications, and provides specific capabilities to support 
realization of distinct service categories that play particular 
2011 7th International Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices
15
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
roles in those patterns [25]. We use these different 
collaboration patterns to create a specific service zone for the 
partner participating in the VO to build an ESB federation [26] 
[27] (Virtual ESB) to support VO collaborations. The 
components in the deployment artifact layer shown in Figure 1 
facilitate VO process management above the virtual ESB as 
shown in Figure 3
Figure 4: A Proposed Architecture for the SOA infrastructure 
Except the ESBs that facilitate the virtual ESB in every 
organization, we assume that a service oriented infrastructure is 
in place which helps organizations to implement their own 
services.  The VO processes will then run on their service 
oriented infrastructures. As such, no additional infrastructure 
will be required for the VO. In an ideal service oriented world, 
deployment of a VO would only require zone specific 
configurations. Figure 4 illustrates the architecture of such an 
SOA infrastructure. This architecture is based on the S3 
reference architecture [13], IBMs web sphere SOA foundation 
and Oracles SOA suite 11g architecture. The first layer 
includes ESB and UDDI registry. The second layer is a 
business process engine which mainly supports BPEL 
executions and service compositions. At the third layer, a 
business rule engine facilitates the enforcement of business 
rules throughout the service execution lifetime. This layer 
would be responsible to guarantee policies defined in the 
higher level of the framework. And finally, at the top layer, a 
Complex Event Processing Engine (CEP) triggers various 
events, and facilitates an event-driven architecture in the 
service execution environment. The Business Activity 
Monitoring (BAM) module monitors the infrastructure, and the 
performance of the services to facilitate the SLA management. 
The service desk moduleí which is at the edge of the 
infrastructure and can be considered as a part of a bigger help 
desk solution of the owner organizationí is a necessary 
component of ITIL. Most of the features and benefits of the 
proposed framework is realized by employing a suitable ESB.  
F. Supervision And Governance 
This layer of the framework focuses on driving VO 
towards the right direction based on performance monitoring 
and the feedback it receives. It facilitates forecasting, planning 
and design of future trends of the VO which result in continual 
improvement and change management in the virtual 
organization. Performance coaching includes the efforts taken 
for performance appraisal, and providing appropriate feedbacks 
to partners in order to improve their performance based on the 
specified objectives and performance targets. In other words, 
performance coaching is the systematic effort to link the 
performance reviews and evaluations to the continuous training 
and development [28]. The benefit sharing component aligns 
VO partner benefits based on the value constellation and value 
creation in accordance to their performance. It uses 
performance as the criteria for assessing rewards or sharing 
benefits [28], as well as services offered through the 
infrastructure. These two components are both drivers for 
moving the performance of partner organizations to desired 
level of performance. Accounting is related to the financial 
shared activities of the VO which is affected by the benefit 
sharing component of this layer. This component requires 
further specification that is not addressed in this framework, 
and is left to the VO financial planners. Finally, the evolution 
driver is a set of processes designed to drive appropriate 
changes in the VO based on performance monitoring aspects 
[3]. These changes are classified in three categories: the first 
one is usually within a partner’s services, and only triggers 
performance indicators; the second category is the one that 
affects VO service choreographies, and is results in a higher 
level change in VO; and finally, the third category which 
involves changes in VO value creation and might even result in 
renegotiation between partners.  
III.
THE SCOPE OF THE PROPOSED SOVO PROCESS 
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
 As discussed in section I.B, there are different 
approaches to manage a virtual organization. Our approach is 
based on the PMBOK reference model and its nine knowledge 
areas in combination with a peer-to-peer collaboration that uses 
guidelines and decision protocols derived from performance 
management.. ARCON (A Reference model for COllaborative 
Networks) [8] which is a comprehensive modeling framework 
for CNOs is referenced to illustrate our modeling approach in 
the framework. ARCON reference framework divides CNO 
modeling 
into 
endogenous 
elements 
and 
exogenous 
interactions. Our proposed framework focuses on modeling the 
endogenous structural, componential, functional and behavioral 
elements of VOs in various PMBOK knowledge areas except 
the risk management. The framework does not intend to model 
or provide any guidelines on exogenous interactions of VOs. 
Since we are using a service oriented infrastructure for 
implementing VO , ITIL foundation V3 is considered as a third 
reference for the framework in order to define VO service 
design and management principals, and to highlight VOs 
governance and continual improvement [14].
IV.
BENEFITS OF THE FRAMEWORK
The collaboration model and the infrastructure proposed 
in this paper facilitate a peer-to-peer inter-organization 
collaboration through existing SOA infrastructures in the 
organizations. The proposed framework specifies the design 
and management of VO business processes in a service 
oriented environment. This offers several benefits including 1) 
facilitating creation of global virtual organizations faster and 
easier 
through 
web 
services. 
With 
this 
framework, 
organizations in various geographical positions can form a 
secure infrastructure for their B2B interactions with less cost 
and easy configuration; 2) B2B interactions and VO formation 
is done more efficiently and the total cost and effort of VO 
formation and maintenance are reduced; 3) The framework 
provides agile inter-organization process automation, and 
brings dynamicity as a competitive advantage to the VO. The 
VO will adapt and integrate with partner’s information systems 
much easier with less cost; 4) VOs dependency to its partner 
16
2011 7th International Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
organization is reduced because of a loosely coupled service 
oriented infrastructure; 5) This infrastructure facilitates 
collaboration among any network of organizations using any 
common topologies; and 6) Since the proposed infrastructure is 
based on current partners SOA infrastructure, and due to the 
SOAs scalable and reusable nature, the risk of VO creation will 
be reduced significantly because of low initial investment.  
V.
COLCLUSIONS 
Inter-organizational collaboration and interactions are 
becoming essential to businesses in today’s fierce competitive 
environment. Thus, heterogeneous networks of organizations 
come together to form virtual organization with peer to peer 
topology. Managing such collaborative environments is 
challenging and requires dynamic IT infrastructures to support 
the variety of topologies. In this paper, (a) a framework for 
designing and modeling SOVO processes was proposed.  The 
framework consists of six main layers, and embeds a continual 
improvement cycle. Further,  the various components in each 
layer is described using standard reference models and best 
practices.; and (b) we  provided a distributed SOA 
infrastructure to facilitate implementation of different VO 
collaborations. We proposed specific service zone for each 
participating organization in the VO to build an ESB federation 
(Virtual ESB). We also described the details of the proposed 
architecture for the SOA infrastructure. This is an ongoing 
research in our center. The proposed infrastructure is currently 
being implemented using IBM WebSphere V7. The 
implementation is done at University of Ottawa in 
collaboration with IBM on a prototype and the results will be 
published in future publications. Some of the PMBOK 
knowledge areas such as risk management and human resource 
management are not fully addressed in this framework, and are 
left as future works. The design of agent based partner 
discovery and negotiation for VO creation will also be 
considered in our future works.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This project is jointly supported by MITACS-Accelerate 
program and IBM center for business analytics and 
performance management. 
REFERENCES
[1]
L.M.Camarinha-Matos, H.Afsarmanesh, and M.Ollus, “ECOLEAD And CNO 
Base Concepts”, Methods and Tools for Collaborative Networked Organizations, 
US, pp. 3–32. Springer, May 2008 
[2]
U.Dorn; C.Grun; H.Werthner, and M.Zapletal; , "A Survey of B2B Methodologies 
and Technologies: From Business Models towards Deployment Artifacts," System 
Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on , 
vol., no., pp.143a, Jan. 2007 
[3]
M.V.Drissen-Silva,. and R.J.Rabelo, “A model for dynamic generation of 
collaborative decision protocols for managing the evolution of virtual enterprises”, 
Proceedings of the 8th IFIP international conference on information technology for 
balance automation systems –BASYS’2008, 23–25 September, Porto, Portugal. 
New York: Springer, 105–114, 2008  
[4]
I.Karvonen, I.Salkari, and M.Ollus , “Characterizing virtual organizations and their 
management”, L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh and A. Ortiz, eds. 
Collaborative networks and their breeding environments,193–204,Springer, 
September 2005 
[5]
L.M.Camarinha-Matos, I.Silveri, and H.Afsarmanesh, “Towards a Framework For 
Creation of Dynamic virtual Organizations”. L.M. Camarinha-Matos, H. 
Afsarmanesh and A. Ortiz, eds. Collaborative networks and their breeding 
environments, Springer, September 2005 
[6]
A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK® guide). 4th 
edition. s.l. : Project Management Journal, 40: 104. doi: 10.1002/pmj.20125, 2009. 
[7]
K.Jansson, I,.Karvonen, M.Ollus, U.Negretto, “Governance and management of 
virtual organizations”, Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Ollus, M. (eds.) 
Methods and Tools for Collaborative Networked Organizations. Springer, 
Heidelberg , 2008 
[8]
L. Camarinha-Matos and H. Afsarmanesh, “A comprehensive modeling framework 
for collaborative networked organizations,” J. Intell. Manuf,vol. 18, pp. 529–542, 
Springer, Oct. 2007. 
[9]
U.Negretto, J.Hodík, L.Král, W.Mulder, M.Ollus, L.Pondrelli and I.Westphal, “VO 
Management Solutions, VO Management e-Services”, Methods and Tools for 
Collaborative Networked Organizations, US, pp. 257–274. Springer, May 2008 
[10] H. Kerrie , and A.Arsanjani, “100 SOA Questions Asked and Answered”, 1st 
edition. : Prentice Hall Press,USA, 2010. 
[11] M.Fiammante, “Dynamic SOA and BPM: Best Practices for Business Process 
Management and SOA Agility”, 1st edition, IBM Press, 2009. 
[12] ISO/IEC CD 14662. Information Technology - Open EDI reference model, Draft 
International Standard ISO/IEC JTC1/SC 30, 1998 
[13] A.Arsanjani, Liang-Jie Zhang; M.Ellis, A.Allam, and K.Channabasavaiah, "S3: A 
Service-Oriented Reference Architecture", IT Professional , vol.9, no.3, pp.10-17, 
May-June 2007. 
[14] Office of Government Commerce. ITIL V3 Core Books. UK, 2007. 
[15] L.Camarinha-Matos, and H.Afsarmanesh, "A framework for virtual organization 
creation in a breeding environment," Annual Reviews in Control, 2007 
[16] C.Huemer, P.Liegl, R.Schuster, H.Werthner, and M.Zapletal, "Inter-organizational 
systems: From business values over business processes to deployment," Digital 
Ecosystems and Technologies, 2008
[17] V.Pijpers, J.Gordijn , and A.Hans., “Exploring inter-organizational alignment with 
e3alignment – An Aviation Case”,  BLED 2009 Proceedings. Paper 2., 2009 
[18] U.Mohamed, G.Galal-Edeen, and A.El-Zoghbi, "Building Integrated Oil and Gas 
B2B E-commerce Hub Architecture Based on SOA," e-Education, e-Business, e-
Management, and e-Learning, 2010. IC4E '10. International Conference on , vol., 
no., pp.599-608, 22-24 Jan. 2010 
[19] BPMN Specification 1.0. s.l. : OMG - Object Management Group, 2006. 
[20] M.Schmidt, B.Hutchison, P.Lambros, and R.Phippen, "The Enterprise Service Bus: 
Making service-oriented architecture real," IBM Systems Journal , vol.44, no.4, 
pp.781-797, 200521.  
[21] W.Mulder, and G.R.Meijer, “Distributed Information Services Supporting 
Collaborative 
Network 
Management” 
,IFIP 
International 
Federation 
for 
Information Processing, Volume 224, Network-Centric Collaboration and 
Supporting Fireworks, eds. Camarinlia-Matos, L., Afsarmanesh, H., Ollus, M., pp. 
491-498. (Boston; Springer), 2006 
[22] F.Graser, I.Westphal, J.Eschenbaecher, “Roadmap on VOPM Challenges on 
Operational and Strategic Level”, ECOLEAD Deliverables 31.1, 2005 
[23] J.Marchewka, 
“Information 
Technology 
Project 
Management: 
Providing 
Measurable Organizational Value”, John Wiley & Sons Inc, New Jersey, 2nd
Edition, pp. 28-61, 2006 
[24] R.S.Kaplan, and D.P.Norton, P. David, “Using the Balanced Scorecard as a 
Strategic Management System”, Harvard Business School. Boston : Harvard 
Business Review,pp. 150-16, 2007 
[25] M. Keen, S. Bishop, A. Hopkins, S. Milinski, C. Hott, R. Robinson, J. Adams, P. 
Verschueren, and A. Acharya, “Patterns: Implementing an SOA Using an 
Enterprise 
Service 
Bus”, 
IBM 
Corporation 
(2004), 
http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/abstracts/sg246346.html.  
[26] D.Bell, “Exploiting IBM WebSphere Service Registry and Repository Feature 
Pack for Service Federation Management to Share Services Between Two 
Domains”, 
IBM 
Corporation 
(2010), 
http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/abstracts/redp4684.html 
[27] F.Baude, 
I.Filali, 
F.Huet, 
V.Legrand, 
E.Mathias, 
P.Merle, 
C.Ruz, 
R.Krummenacher, E.Simperl, C.Hammerling, and JP.Lorre, “ESB Federation for 
Large-scale SOA”, Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing, SAC 2010, pp. 2459–2466. ACM, New York, 2010
[28] R.Dransfield, Robert. “Human Resource Management: Studies in Economics & 
Busines”, Chapter 6, Oxford : Heinemann, 2000
2011 7th International Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices
17
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

