See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317116452
Using Process Indicators to Help the Veriﬁcation of Goal Fulﬁllment
Conference Paper · January 2017
DOI: 10.5220/0006239303450352
CITATION
1
READS
98
5 authors, including:
Henrique Prado de Sá Sousa
Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro
37 PUBLICATIONS   104 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Vanessa Tavares Nunes
University of Brasília
52 PUBLICATIONS   369 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Claudia Cappelli
Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ)
226 PUBLICATIONS   1,135 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Renata Guizzardi
University of Twente
113 PUBLICATIONS   1,911 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Renata Guizzardi on 19 April 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Using Process Indicators to Help the Verification of Goal Fulfillment 
Henrique P. de Sá Sousa1,2, Vanessa T. Nunes3, Claudia Cappelli4, Renata Guizzardi5 and Julio Cesar 
S.p. Leite2 
1Departamento de Matemática, UFRRJ, Seropédica, RJ, Brazil 
2Departamento de Informática, PUC-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 
3Departamento de Ciência da Computação, UnB, Brasília, DF, Brazil 
4Departamento de Informática Aplicada, UNIRIO, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 
2Departamento de Informática, UFES, Vitória, ES, Brazil 
{ hps.infotec, vanunes, renataguizzardi}@gmail.com, claudia.cappelli@uniriotec.br, julio@inf.puc-rio.br 
Keywords: 
Alignment, Business Process, Business Goal, and BPM. 
Abstract: 
Process modelling is often criticized as lacking proper alignment with business goals. Although there is 
literature on different proposals to address the issue, the verification of this alignment remains an obstacle 
during process enactment. We make use of key process indicator (KPI) in a process design method to 
annotate processes/activities with proper information. The method derives this information from the 
business goals and uses it to calculate process indicators. We demonstrate through a real example, modelled 
with the ARIS business process model tool, how the method produces proper indicators, which should be 
used during process enactment. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Business processes models allow the organization to 
document information about how it works and help 
monitoring 
organizational 
development, 
modifications and evolutions, in an effective way. 
Business processes translate inputs into outputs 
creating products, while aiming at achieving goals. 
Therefore, we may infer organizational goals 
through its processes goals. However, the relation 
between processes and goals are not always explicit 
and such relations are in general, difficult to 
determine. 
In order to verify process-goal alignment, it is 
not enough to determine the relationship of goals 
and processes in a model. It is necessary to define 
which elements in the process can help us check if 
these alignments are correct and consistent within 
the organizations. This is discussed in profusion in 
academia, (Guizzardi and Reis, 2015), (Sousa and 
Leite, 2014), (Cardoso et al., 2011), (Cappelli et al., 
2010), (Behnam, 2010), (Braubach et al., 2010), 
(Singh and Woo, 2009), (Soffer and Wand, 2005) 
and (Kueng and Kawalek, 1997), but the state of 
practice is still far from these proposals. Difficulties 
are numerous, from lack of understanding of the 
appropriate level of goals’ abstraction, exacerbated 
focus on operational layer, the lack of and effective 
ability to measure goals achievement through 
business processes execution, to the absence of 
appropriate computer support (Cardoso et al., 2011), 
(Behnam, 2010), (Braubach et al., 2010), (Singh and 
Woo, 2009). 
This is particularly present in the scenario of 
organizations that model their processes without 
identifying and organizing their goals beforehand. 
Another issue is that the majority of the business 
process model tools available in the market, such as 
ARIS tool (ARIS, 2016), while enabling a goal 
macro viewpoint through a relation between goal 
diagrams and value-chain models, still have different 
sort of problems. Some of these problems are: (i) 
lack of differentiation between functional and non-
functional goals; (ii) difficulty in identifying 
whether the process has activities that when 
performed satisfactorily comply with desired goals; 
(iii) difficulty in identifying process activities in 
which the artefacts used to measure the goals are 
produced; (iv) difficult in identifying the actors 
responsible or involved in meeting specific goals (in 
particular, strategic ones). 
The imprecise definition of these elements is due 
to the low expression of the goal modelling 
languages adopted by these tools. These limitations 
contribute negatively by decreasing, for example, 
the ability to assess project risks, the identification 
of possible points of failure, the mitigation of 
impacts on processes and goals changes, and often 
even the prevention of the projection of most 
appropriate solutions in a timely manner to attend 
internal and external demands. 
In this context, this paper presents a method 
based on the relationship among goal models, 
business processes models, and key performance 
indicators (KPIs) to enhance the support for the 
analysis of the alignment between processes and 
goals. KPI’s are elements that can measure the 
achievement of a goal and is calculated using 
information produced during process execution. This 
analysis enables the verification of business process 
capability in producing the information necessary 
for the calculation of process indicators, which 
allows the verification of goals fulfilment. Thereby, 
we seek to provide a solution for the alignment 
between process and goal to be obtained and 
analysed satisfactorily; avoiding the difficulties 
mentioned and allowing the organization to 
effectively ensure that processes are modelled in 
order to achieve its strategic goals. An overall 
strategy related to this proposal was presented in 
(Sousa and Leite, 2014), which summarizes Sousa's 
dissertation (Sousa, 2012). In this paper, we focus on 
the information needed to treat indicators as part of 
business processes in the ARIS framework. 
The proposed method was used in an industry 
real case study, using ARIS platform and supported 
by the development of a "script" on ARIS Design 
platform, which enables the automation of the 
proposed analysis. At the end, a final report 
containing information about all the elements 
involved is presented (e.g., actors, activities, 
information, indicators, goals and processes). 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
presents related works, Section 3 shows the proposal 
and the method used in this work, Section 4 apply 
the method in a real scenario, Section 5 explain how 
the method was automated in ARIS tool and Section 
6 presents conclusions and future works. 
2 RELATED WORK 
This is not a new issue. Some proposed ideas 
indicate forms of organization, formal establishment 
and practices for the implementation and evaluation 
of the alignment between processes and goals. 
Kueng 
and 
Kawalek 
(1997) 
presented 
a 
methodology to model and evaluate processes at a 
conceptual level that supports the specification of 
goals and the fundamental purpose of a designed 
system. To do so, one ought to (a) define the goals 
related to the business process, goal measurement 
criteria and constraints; (b) derive and define the 
business activities; (c) describe and define roles; and 
(d) model the objects that will contain the obtained 
information. Although the authors’ aims are 
correlated to our, they don´t focus on what is 
required for the goals to be systematically measured. 
They pose a strong focus on the relation among 
goals, activities and how to support process 
automation through an object-oriented approach. 
An extensively used approach is the Balance 
Score Card (BSC) (Kaplan et al, 1996) that guides 
organizations on how to translate its mission and 
strategy 
into 
goals. 
BSC 
establishes 
a 
comprehensive set of performance measures that, 
when associated to business processes allow the 
alignment checking between goals and processes. 
However, it is not possible to find out the alignment 
between goals and processes.  
OMG developed the Business Motivation Model 
(BMM) (OMG, 2008), which seeks to provide a 
framework for the development, communication and 
management of business goals by identifying the 
factors that motivate their establishment and the 
elements that are part of business plans. The model 
presents how these elements and goals are 
interrelated through policies and business rules. 
Thus, a BMM model seeks to answer, primarily, to 
two major questions: a) what is required to achieve 
organization’s desires? b) why does each element in 
the business plan exist? Although supporting a 
person to answer these two questions, BMM does 
not try to identify which are the processes and or 
activities achieved by each goal. 
Other researchers as (OMG, 2008), (Almeida and 
Guizzardi, 2008), (Kavakli and Loucopoulos, 2006), 
(Yu et al., 2006), (Bresciani et al., 2004), (Liu and 
Yu, 2004), (Cysneiros et al., 2003), (Guizzardi et al., 
2003), (Yu, 1996), (Davenport, 1993), have shown 
the representation of intentionality in the process 
models as a possible solution in order to guarantee 
the alignment between goals and business processes. 
The explicitness of intentionality seeks to represent 
the dependencies between processes and the actors' 
needs and desires. It is believed that through this 
kind of representation, one can ensure alignment 
between goals and processes. However, these works 
do not respond what to do with the tons of goal and 
process models that are currently already part of the 
organizations’ model repositories. Our work on the 
other hand may be applied to pre-existing goal and 
process models. 
Some approaches focus on the alignment among 
different methodologies and tools as Koliadis (2006) 
who proposes methodologies to guide analysts to 
reflect changes in a i* model (Yu, 1996) (that 
represents goals models) into a model using 
Business Process Model Notation (BPMN) (that 
represent process models) and vice versa. Neiger 
and Churilov (2004) follow the same line describing 
a framework for integrating business processes 
(modelled in ARIS using event-driven process chain 
– EPC - notation) and goals (modelled on VFT 
framework - Value Focused Thinking - of decision 
sciences). These works are interesting especially 
because the proposed methods can be applied in 
both directions (i.e. goals to processes and processes 
to goals). However, the alignment is intuitively 
indicated rather than presumed by the indicators, as 
in our work. In this respect, we believe our work 
provides stronger proof of alignment than the cited 
ones. 
Other approaches propose the implementation of 
part of the methodology through the analysis of the 
models generated by various methods, but with 
technological constraints that currently do not meet 
market needs, such as the one proposed by Halleux 
et al. (2008). 
Researchers such as Nurcan et al., (2005) 
propose a reformulation on the way of thinking in 
processes through process modelling oriented to 
maps that consist of a representation system based 
on intentions and strategies. This map is able to 
abstract 
from 
business 
processes 
details 
to 
emphasize 
organizational 
goals 
and 
their 
satisfaction. Although it is extremely interesting 
from a strategic point of view, its use in 
organizations requires a reformulation in the way 
processes are modelled. 
del-Río-Ortega et al. (2012) proposed the 
PPINOT metamodel that is based on Process 
Performance Indicators (PPI) which are linked to 
process elements. In our approach we depart from 
the detailment of goals requirements in terms of 
business process elements that are used to express 
goal satisfaction. 
Guizzard et al. (2015) proposed a method that 
supports the identification of the activities in a 
business process that satisfy organization’s goals. 
This work focuses on the alignment between 
processes and goals in the operational level by 
translating process models into i* models. We go 
further into exploring this alignment using indicators 
and analysing the existence of the necessary 
information to verify goals-process alignment in 
their original notation. 
For all seen, there are still gaps regarding a 
precise verification of operational processes models 
to be considered suitable for a performance analysis 
in relation to its intended goals. We are convinced 
that procedural BPM methods are useful and more 
naturally elicited from stakeholders. We understand 
that our proposal, by integrating business process 
models with goal models, will profit from the fact 
that several organizations have their business 
processes modelled.  
3 THE PROPOSAL 
In ARIS, the Organizational Value Chain is 
composed by macro processes that can be 
decomposed into other processes. A process can 
contribute to the achievement of one or more 
organizational goals. All defined goals must be 
related to at least one process. 
Each existing goal in an organization (regardless 
of the level of abstraction) requires that a set of 
conditions be satisfied in order to the goal can be 
considered fulfilled. The term "condition" refers, for 
example, to the development of a product, to a 
process 
status, 
to 
the 
production 
of 
some 
information, to the triggering of a specific event or 
anything that can be reached from the execution of a 
process. These conditions (or set of conditions) 
expected by a goal are defined by elements named as 
"indicators". When indicators are linked to goals 
they express the conditions that must be reached in 
order to consider the goal satisfied. When 
interconnected with processes they represent the 
conditions that are expected to be reached by a 
process instance. There is a smoothly difference, 
based on the level of abstraction and perspective. 
The business process is accomplished by 
executing a set of activities. The successful 
conclusion of the process is entirely related to the 
production of the necessary conditions for fulfilment 
of their goals. That is, the process is responsible for 
producing all the expected conditions in order to 
achieve the goals related to it. The production of 
these conditions is closely linked to the different 
states and transformation of information that is 
processed during the execution of activities. 
As the natural execution of the process generates 
the different conditions necessary to achieve the 
goals of the process, it is understood that the 
indicators must be defined according to the 
production of these elements during their execution. 
The elements produced by the process are vestiges 
that indicate if the process actually produced what is 
expected, which is defined by the indicators. 
Therefore, the elements that are needed to 
calculate an indicator are produced in the process 
(generally modelled as a product (output) of the 
activities). 
Considering 
these 
elements, 
we 
addressed the pre-conditions necessary for the 
enactment of a given indicator. Namely, if there is 
an absence of information necessary for a given 
indicator at design time, we report the possibility of 
misalignment among goals and processes. 
As such, our work presents a method that checks 
the possibility of fulfilment of the goals of a 
business process, at design time, making possible a 
future analysis of the information generated during 
process execution. 
3.1 
The Method 
The proposed method has 5 phases as presented 
below:  
1. Identify the goals of the process: list the goals 
that must be achieved by the process.  
2. Identify the purpose of the indicator: define 
KPIs that must express the goals satisfaction.  
3. Identify the target for the indicator: Identify the 
targets for each process goal.  
4. Correlate information to calculate the indicator: 
Identify and list information needed to 
calculate each indicator.  
5. Identify the sources of information needed to 
calculate 
the 
indicator: 
Check 
if 
the 
information needed to calculate each KPI are 
produced in the related processes or comes 
from other processes. 
In summary, the proposed method allows the 
verification of whether the process produces the 
necessary information to calculate the indicators 
related to process goals. If so, business process and 
goals models are said to be aligned. However, if 
some information is missing, then a potential 
misalignment between process and goals is reported. 
3.2 
The Method through ARIS Tool 
Figure 1a shows a VAC (Value Added Chain) model 
using ARIS tool. It consists of a business process 
that is decomposed into two sub-processes: Process 
1 and Process 2. Process 1 has its identified goals 
(goals 1 and 2). Figure 1b shows the KPIs 1 and 2 of 
Goals 1 and 2 respectively and information used to 
calculate each KPI. The alignment between goals 
and indicators is done by checking where in the 
process the information required for calculating 
KPIs is produced. Process activities (Figure 1c) are 
modelled in EPC language. Process 1 has two roles 
(Role 1 and 2) and comprises three activities 
(Activities 1, 2 and 3). There is also five information 
entities (Information 5, 8 9, and 10). These 
information entities are the data necessary to 
calculate the KPI`s. 
In ARIS tool, each activity can be detailed in its 
operational level. Figure 2 (a, b, c) demonstrates 
models of activities 1, 2 and 3 respectively, 
containing roles, input and output information. The 
rectangles represent input or output information 
handled during process execution. Information 
represented as a puzzles are the ones used to 
calculate the KPI’s. 
By analysing the activities of the Process 1, it is 
possible to verify that the information needed to 
calculate KPI 1 is being produced by activities 1 and 
3. However, KPI 2 cannot be calculated because 
information 9 and 10 are not being produced by 
process 1. Therefore, Process 1 can be verified only 
in relation to Goal 1. The method permits to verify if 
the process represents or even produces the 
necessary information to calculate the indicators 
related to its goals. 
 
Figure 1: a) Business Process x Goal, b) Goal X Indicator 
X Information, and c) Process 1 in detail. 
 
Figure 2: Activities X roles X inputs X outputs. 
4 APPLICATION IN A REAL 
SCENARIO  
In order to validate the proposed method, it was 
applied in the process "Manage requests of project 
practices support" of the IT department of a large 
Brazilian oil and gas company. This process is 
responsible 
for 
the 
analysis, 
prioritization, 
implementation and monitoring of the demands that 
come from the organization's business areas to the 
Support Department related to Project Practices 
(SPP). The process model, in ARIS, comprises 56 
activities and is, therefore, too long to be displayed 
in its entirety. Thus, its summary is described below: 
The process begins with the identification of a 
needed SPP service by the customer, who makes 
his/her request. Next, the client's business area 
manager has the possibility to inform whether he/she 
wants to approve all requests from his/her area, only 
be notified about the requests or even not being 
notified. Upon arriving at the SPP, the demand is 
received by the manager, who defines its nature and 
decides if the demand can be attended by SPP. Then, 
the effort to attend the demand is estimated (in terms 
of man-hour) and the demand is analysed by a 
responsible in charge, depending on the estimated 
value (in HH or cost). If approved, the demand 
returns to the manager who will delegate tasks to 
performers and monitor the execution of the 
attendance. Upon execution, the service is validated 
by a validation group. It is approved or not by the 
client and at the end he/she fills out a questionnaire 
to evaluate the service. 
The process "Manage requests of project 
practices support" has two goals (defined by the 
organization): "Ensure efficiency in attending SPP 
demands" and "Ensure the management of SPP 
demands attendance process". Due to space reasons, 
only the alignment of the first goal is presented in 
this section. To be achieved, this goal ought to be 
measured, 
hence 
indicators 
(defined 
by 
the 
organization) are used with this aim. Figure 3 shows 
the four indicators necessary to verify the fulfilment 
of this goal and the information used in their 
calculation. The indicators are: "Adequacy and level 
of plan attendance", "Time spent with planning", 
"Compliance 
with 
effort 
estimates" 
and 
"Compliance with data estimates". Each of these 
indicators is calculated based on two or more 
information. 
For 
example, 
the 
indicator 
"Compliance with effort estimates" is calculated 
based on the "Estimated effort" and "Real effort".  
 
 
Figure 3: Indicators X Information of process “Manage 
requests of project practices support” 
Each indicator has associated with it a 
calculation method (defined by the organization). 
Table 1 shows each calculation method of the 
indicators shown in Figure 3. 
To check whether the alignment between the 
process "Manage requests of project practices 
support" and the goal "Ensure efficiency in attending 
SPP demands" exists, it is necessary to identify if the 
indicators related to this goal can effectively be 
calculated during process execution. To this end, the 
information used to calculate this indicator should 
result from the execution of activities of that 
process. 
Table 1: Indicators X Calculation Method. 
Indicator 
Calculation Method 
Adequacy 
and 
level 
of 
plan 
attendance 
Does not apply. The manager defines 
the adequacy (low, medium or high) 
and the level of depth (low, medium or 
high) according to his/her experience 
in attending demands and the SPP 
historical information. 
Time spent with 
planning 
TEMPL = (Planning Time / Estimated 
effort) * 100 
Compliance 
with 
effort 
estimates 
EFFest-HH = (Real effort – Estimated 
effort) / (Estimated effort) * 100 
Compliance 
with 
data 
estimates 
ESTIMATED_TIME = Estimated end 
date – Estimated start date 
REAL_TIME = Real end date – Real 
start date 
DATAest-T 
= 
(REAL_TIME 
– 
ESTIMATED_TIME) 
/ 
ESTIMATED_TIME * 100 
 
Taking the "Manage requests of project practices 
support" process, we find three activities that 
effectively 
provide 
the 
information 
for 
the 
calculation of these four indicators. They are 
"Estimate demand," "Plan demand implementation" 
and "Run demand tasks". These activities are 
presented in Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure. 6 
 
Figure. 4: “Estimate demand” activity model. 
 
Figure 5: “Plan demand implementation” activity model. 
Figure. 6: “Run demand tasks” activity model. 
Analysing the models, it is possible to verify 
that:  
§ 
The indicator "Adequacy and level of plan 
attendance" can be calculated based on the 
information of adequacy and level of depth, 
generated by the activity "Plan demand 
implementation"; 
§ 
The indicator "Time spent with planning" can 
be calculated based on the information of the 
time spent with the activity "Plan demand 
implementation" and on the information of the 
estimation effort generated in the activity 
"Estimate demand." 
§ 
The "Compliance with effort estimates" can be 
calculated based on the information of the 
estimation effort resulting from the activity 
"Estimating demand" and real effort, after the 
"Run demand tasks" activity. 
§ 
The "Compliance with data estimates" can be 
calculated based on the information of 
estimated start date and estimated end date 
generated in the activity "Plan demand 
implementation" and the information of the 
real start date and real end date obtained from 
the "Run demand tasks" activity. 
As all indicators can be calculated from 
information obtained in the activities of the "Manage 
requests of project practices support” process, then it 
is concluded that this process is aligned with the 
goal "Ensure efficiency in attending SPP demands”, 
and as such, during execution time, it is possible to 
calculate possible detours in the process concerning 
this specific goal. 
5 METHOD AUTOMATION IN 
ARIS 
The ARIS Business Architect tool has a module 
called Script Editor, which is an environment for 
script programming. This module offers a set of 
specific functions for manipulating elements from 
the ARIS database created in the modelling 
activities. These scripts can be programed to 
navigate through objects and models extracting the 
existent information, however, it is also possible to 
create elements and models in an automated way. 
In the extraction of elements information, ARIS 
provides as output files the following formats: RTF, 
PDF, HTML, TXT, DOC, XLS and XML. These 
reports can feed databases and support services. 
The script for our proposal automation was 
developed to produce spreadsheets containing 
information about the elements. It can be started 
from a goal or a process. First, the script checks for 
missing 
elements 
that 
would 
prevent 
its 
implementation. If everything is correct, the script 
will tour the models and their objects, obtaining the 
necessary information to fill in the fields of the 
spreadsheet. 
The report was developed in an XLS format. The 
final XLS file has one spreadsheet for each element 
(process or goal) involved and one containing 
general summary. 
Table 2 shows an example of spreadsheet 
generated from the analysis applied in a process that 
has a relationship with the "Goal 1" (Figure 1). The 
information is ordered as follows: 
Information about the process that started the 
script – name, description, name of goals related 
with the process, name of the goals valued by the 
script, all the information present in the process. 
Information about the goal valued – name, 
description, list of indicators names present in the 
goal model. 
For each indicator related with the goal, the 
spreadsheet has: name, description and name of the 
necessary information to calculate the indicator 
witch are present in the indicators diagram.  
For each of group of information the spreadsheet 
has: name, description, name of activities where the 
information is present in the process, followed by 
their roles.  
Table 2: Results from process analysis for Goal 1. 
Process 
Name 
Process 1 
Goal(s) Related 
Goal 1; Goal 2 
Goal evaluated 
Goal 1 
Information been used in the 
process 
Information 1; 
Information 2; 
Information 3; 
Information 4; 
Information 6; 
Information 7; 
Goal 
  
Name 
Goal 1 
Indicator(s) related 
KPI 1; 
KPI  
  
Name 
KPI 1 
Information 
necessary 
to 
calculate KPI 1 
Information 5; 
Information 8; 
Information 
necessary 
to 
calculate KPI 1 
  
Name 
Information 5 
Activity 
Activity 1; Activity 2; 
Role(s) 
Role 1; 
Information 
necessary 
to 
calculate KPI 1 
  
Name 
Information 8 
Activity 
Activity 3; 
Role(s) 
Role 2; 
Conclusion 
All necessary 
information to calculate 
KPI 1 is in the process. 
 
Finally, a list of the information present in the 
indicators model and related to the indicators of the 
evaluated goal that were not found in the process are 
presented. If all information were found, the 
spreadsheet shows a message informing of this 
condition. As such, being an automated way to 
detected problems with verification of alignment 
during design time. 
This same information structure is presented in 
the other spreadsheets, but the general spreadsheet 
(containing the summary of the analysis) will be 
created only if exists one more goal or process to be 
analysed. 
6 CONCLUSIONS 
Using modelled processes that are not aligned to the 
organizational goals is risky. After all, organizations 
must keep up with their own strategies, besides 
assuring that organizational processes work towards 
achieving such strategies. Nevertheless, the current 
scenario shows that BPM methods do not effectively 
solve the misalignment problem between goals and 
processes. In an attempt to provide a solution for 
that, our research provides a method, which has been 
used with success in a real case study. The 
experience showed that the method supports the 
analysis of goals and business alignment, helping the 
analyst to identify if there is any need for 
reengineering. The paper describes the method and 
exemplifies it by means of a case study. As such, we 
show that it is possible to detect problems during 
design 
time 
that 
will 
impose 
obstacles 
to 
misalignment detection at execution time. 
As usual, in modelling approaches, it is 
paramount to provide effective automated support. 
We could achieve the needed results in our case 
study, by applying scripts with a first cut prototype. 
Nevertheless, in that case, we faced some limitations 
due to the BPM suite adopted in the organization 
and the fact that it is a proprietary system. For the 
future, we plan to provide more sophisticated 
support to the user on identifying and analysing the 
impact of alignments and misalignments of goals 
and processes. Moreover, we also aim at applying 
this method in other studies to confirm our findings, 
and to integrate it to process runtime alignment 
verification. 
REFERENCES 
ARIS, 2016. url: http://www.softwareag.com/corporate/ 
products/new_releases/aris9/overview/default.asp, 
Accessed in: 10/11/2016. 
Almeida, J.P.A., Guizzardi, G., 2008. A Semantic 
Foundation for Role-Related Concepts in Enterprise 
Modeling. In EDOC 2008, 12th IEEE International 
Enterprise Computing Conference. IEEE Computer 
Society Press, Munchen, Germany. 
Behnam, S.A., Amyot, D., Mussbacher, G., 2010. 
Towards a Pattern-Based Framework for Goal-Driven 
Business 
Process 
Modeling. 
In 
Eighth 
ACIS 
International Conference on Software Engineering 
Research, Management and Applications. pp 137-145. 
Montreal. Canada. 
Braubach, L., Pokahr, A., Jander, K., Lamersdorf, W., 
Burmeister, B., 2010. Go4Flex: Goal-oriented Process 
Modeling. In IDC-2010, 4th International Symposium 
on Intelligent Distributed Computing. pp 77-87. 
Tangier. Morocco. 
Bresciani, P., Giorgini, P., Giunchiglia, F., Mylopoulos, J., 
Perini, A. Tropos: An Agent-Oriented Software 
Development Methodology, In: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Vol. 8, pp. 203—236. 2004. 
Cappelli, C., Santoro F.M., Leite, J.C.S.P, Batista, T., 
Medeiros, A.L., Romeiro, C.S.C., 2010. Reflections 
on the modularity of business process models: The 
case for introducing the aspect-oriented paradigm, In 
Business 
Process 
Management 
Journal. 
16(4): 
Emerald. pp 662-687. 
Cardoso, E.C.S., Guizzardi, R.S.S., Almeida, J.P.A., 2011. 
Aligning Goal Analysis and Business Process 
Modeling: A Case Study in Health Care. In 
International Journal of Business Process Integration 
and Management. v 5. i 2. Inderscience. 
Cysneiros Filho, G., Zisman, A. Spanoudakis, G. 
Traceability Approach for I* and UML Models, In: 
Proceedings of 2nd International Workshop on 
Software Engineering for Large-Scale Multi-Agent 
Systems (SELMAS’03), Portland, May, 2003. 
Davenport, T.H., 1993. Process Innovation. Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, MA. 
Del-Río-Ortega, M. Resinas, C. Cabanillas, A. Ruiz-
Cortés. On the Definition and Automated Design-
Time Analysis of Process Performance Indicators. 
Information Systems, 2012. 
Guizzardi, R.S.S, Perini, A., Dignum, V., 2003. Using 
Intentional 
Analysis 
to 
Model 
Knowledge 
Management 
Requirements 
in 
Communities 
of 
Practice. Technical Report TR-CTIT-03-53. 
Guizzardi, R., Reis, A.N., 2015. A Method to Align Goals 
and Business Processes. In ER2015, 34th International 
Conference. Stockholm. Sweden. pp 79-93.  
Halleux, P., Mathieu, L., Andersson, B., 2008. A Method 
to Support the Alignment of Business Models and 
Goal Models. In BUSITAL'08, Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Workshop on Business/IT-Alignment and 
Interoperability. CEUR Workshop Proceeding. 
Kaplan S., Norton P., Robert D., 1996. The Balanced 
Scorecard: Translating Strategy Into Action. President 
and Fellows of Harvard College. Boston. 1 ed. 
Kavakli, E., Loucopoulos, P., 2006. Experiences with 
Goal-Oriented Modeling of Organizational Change. In 
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics - 
Part C. v 36. I 2. pp 221-235. 
Koliadis, G. G., 2006. A. Relating business process 
models to goal-oriented requirements models in 
KAOS. In Proceeding of Advances in Knowledge 
Acquisition 
and 
Management., 
Pacific 
Rim 
Knowledge Acquisition Workshop. pp 25-39. 
Kueng, P., Kawalek, P., 1997. Goal-based business 
process models: creation and evaluation, In Business 
Process Management Journal, v 3. n 1. pp 17-38. 
Liu, L., Yu, E., 2004. Intentional Modeling to Support 
Identity Management, In ER 2004, 23rd Int. 
Conference on Conceptual Modeling. Shanghai, 
China. LNCS 3288. Springer. pp 555-566. 
Neiger, D., Churilov, L., 2004. Goal-Oriented Business 
Process Modeling with EPCs and Value-Focused 
Thinking. In Business Process Management, LNCS 
3080. pp 98– 115. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
OMG. 
2016. 
Business 
Motivation 
Model, 
url: 
http://www.omg.org/spec/BMM. 
Accessed 
in: 
10/11/2016. 
Nurcan, S., Etien, A., Kaabi, A., Zoukar, I., Rolland, C., 
2005. A Strategy Driven Business Process Modelling 
Approach. In Business Process Management Journal. 
Special issue on Goal-oriented business process 
modeling. Emerald. v 11. i 6. 
Singh, S.N., Woo C., 2009. Investigating business-IT 
alignment through multi-disciplinary goal concepts. 
Requirements Engineering, v 14. i 3. Pp 177-207. 
Springer-Verlag. New York, Inc. 
Soffer, P., Wand, Y., 2005. On the notion of soft goals in 
business process modeling, Journal of Business 
Process Management. v 11. n 6. pp 663-79. 
Sousa, H.P., 2012. Integrating Intentional Modeling to 
Business 
Modeling. 
Master’s 
Dissertation. 
Departamento de Informática. PUC-Rio. 
Sousa, 
H.P., 
Leite, 
J.C.S.P., 
2014. 
Modeling 
Organizational Alignment. Conceptual Modeling. 
LNCS, v 8824. pp 407-414 Springer. 
Yu, E., 1996. Modeling strategic relationships for process 
reengineering, 181 f. Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ont.,Canada. 
Yu, E., Strohmaier, M., Deng., X., 2006. Exploring 
Intentional Modeling and Analysis for Enterprise 
Architecture. In EDOC2016, 10th IEEE International 
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference 
Workshops. Proceedings of the Workshop on Trends 
in Enterprise Architecture Research (TEAR). Hong 
Kong, China. 
View publication stats

