PPINOT Tool Suite: A Performance
Management Solution for Process-Oriented
Organisations⋆
Adela del-R´ıo-Ortega, Cristina Cabanillas,
Manuel Resinas, and Antonio Ruiz-Cort´es
Universidad de Sevilla, Spain
{adeladelrio,resinas,aruiz}@us.es, cristina.cabanillas@wu.ac.at
Abstract. A key aspect in any process-oriented organisation is the mea-
surement of process performance for the achievement of its strategic
and operational goals. Process Performance Indicators (PPIs) are a key
asset to carry out this evaluation, and, therefore, the management of
these PPIs throughout the whole BP lifecycle is crucial. In this demo
we present PPINOT Tool Suite, a set of tools aimed at facilitating and
automating the PPI management. The support includes their deﬁnition
using either a graphical or a template-based textual notation, their auto-
mated analysis at design-time, and their automated computation based
on the instrumentation of a Business Process Management System.
1
Deﬁning and Analysing PPIs with PPINOT
Performance requirements on business processes (BPs) are usually speciﬁed in
terms of Process Performance Indicators (PPIs), which are quantiﬁable metrics
that can be measured directly by data that is generated within the process ﬂow
and are aimed at evaluating the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of business process.
The management of those PPIs is, thus, an important part of the BP lifecycle
that includes at least the deﬁnition of PPIs, their analysis to ﬁnd relationships
between them, the instrumentation of the information systems that support the
BPs in order to take the measures that are necessary to calculate the PPIs, the
actual calculation of the PPIs during process execution, and the monitoring of
the PPIs fulﬁllment.
The PPINOT Metamodel [1] provides a foundation on which an automated
support for these activities can be built. It identiﬁes the concepts that are nec-
essary for deﬁning Process Performance Indicators (PPIs) such as the diﬀerent
types of measures that can be used to compute the PPI value. It was deﬁned
to address the challenge of providing PPI deﬁnitions that are unambiguous and
⋆This work was partially supported by the European Commission (FEDER), the
Spanish and the Andalusian R&D&I programmes (grants TIN2009-07366 (SETI),
TIN2012-32273 (TAPAS), TIC-5906 (THEOS)). The authors thank the PPINOT
development team at the ISA group, for their development work; concretely Ana
Bel´en S´anchez and Edelia Garc´ıa.
S. Basu et al. (Eds.): ICSOC 2013, LNCS 8274, pp. 675–678, 2013.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
676
A. del-R´ıo-Ortega et al.
complete, traceable to the business process elements used in their deﬁnition, in-
dependent of the language used to model business processes (BP) and amenable
to automated analysis.
Two notations have been developed on top of the PPINOT Metamodel, namely
a graphical notation and a template-based textual notation [2]. The former ex-
tends BPMN to allow the graphical deﬁnition of PPIs together with their cor-
responding BPs. The latter provides a template for PPIs and a set of linguistic
patterns the user must follow to make the PPI deﬁnition easier [2]. Figure 1 shows
an example of a PPI deﬁned using PPINOT. The left hand side corresponds to
a template-based deﬁnition, the right hand side depicts the corresponding XML
serialisation of the PPINOT Metamodel.
Fig. 1. An example of a PPI deﬁned with PPINOT
The PPINOT Metamodel is also provided with formal semantics based on
Description Logics (DL). This enables leveraging reasoning operations imple-
mented by oﬀ-the-shelf DL reasoners to automatically extract information from
the relationships between PPIs and BP elements. This information can be used
to assist process analysts in the deﬁnition and instrumentation of PPIs [1].
In this paper, we give an overview of the PPINOT Tool Suite, which is a set
of tools based on the PPINOT Metamodel that automate or facilitate some of
the aforementioned PPI management activities.
2
PPINOT Tool Suite Overview
Figure 2 overviews the tools that compose the PPINOT Tool Suite. Rectangles
depict tools, their inputs and outputs are represented by documents linked with
dashed arrows, and the possible interconnections between tools is done by using
solid arrows. The tools can be used separately or sequentially, depending on the
user purposes. In the following we describe a possible way to use it.
Design. The PPINOT Tool Suite oﬀers two diﬀerent ways to deﬁne PPIs. On
the one hand, we can deﬁne them graphically together with the BPMN repre-
sentation of the BP using the PPINOT Graphical Editor, which is a web editor
that has been implemented as an extension of the Oryx platform [3]. On the
other hand, we can use the PPINOT Templates Editor to deﬁne PPIs using the
template-based textual notation. The tool guides the user by providing linguis-
tic patterns according to the selection performed in the diﬀerent ﬁelds. In both
PPINOT Tool Suite: A Performance Management Solution
677
Business
Process 
Editor
PPINOT 
Templates 
Editor
PPINOT 
Analyser
PPINOT Graphical Editor
BPMS
PPINOT 
Instrumenter
PPINOT 
Reporter
CEP
PPI Database
BP+PPI 
XML
Users
Process 
Responsible
Process 
Responsible
Process 
Designer
s 
ble

	


Fig. 2. PPINOT Tool Suite Overview
cases, an XML document with the PPI information together with the BP model
is obtained as output.
Analysis. After deﬁning the PPIs, the PPINOT Analyser can be used. It uses the
DL formalisation of PPINOT metamodel to implement the analysis operations
that obtain information about the way PPIs and BP elements inﬂuence each
other. Concretely, two kinds of analysis operations are currently supported: (I)
BPElements involved, which allows answering the question Given a PPI, Which
are the process model’s elements involved?. This information is useful for instance
when a PPI must be replaced with others (maybe because it is very costly to
obtain its value) and it is necessary to assure that every element of the BP that
was measured before is measured in the new case; and (II) PPIs associated to
BPElement, which allows answering the question Given a BPElement, Which
are the PPIs associated or applied to it?. This information can assist during the
evolution of BPs (e.g., an activity is deleted) to identify which PPIs will be
aﬀected and should be updated.
Execution. The last set of tools that can be used are those focused on the
execution of the BP. Before execution, the PPINOT Instrumenter conﬁgures
Activiti (an open source BPMS1) to send events to a Complex Event Processor
(CEP) and also conﬁgures the CEP to compute the values of the deﬁned PPIs
from the events generated by Activiti during BP execution. The computed values
of the PPIs are stored in a PPI Database. Finally, the PPINOT Reporter can
be used to present the user these values2.
1 http://activiti.org.
2 In its current version this tool provides a simple list of values. An extension to
provide a proper report is planned.
678
A. del-R´ıo-Ortega et al.
Further information about PPINOT Tool Suite, the description of the tools
and user instructions can be found at http://www.isa.us.es/ppinot.
3
Signiﬁcance and Features
PPINOT Tool Suite has been developed from research results, and validated and
extended thanks to the feedback obtained from several real scenarios, both from
organisations and academia. To the best of our knowledge, there not exists any
similar tool for the deﬁnition and design-time analysis of PPIs. Concretely, we
can highlight the following features, from which the last four provide the novelty
to our proposal:
BPMN 2.0 compliant. PPIs can be deﬁned over BP diagrams (BPDs) pre-
viously modelled using the de facto standard BPMN 2.0.
PPI values computation Taking as starting point any of the aforementioned
PPI deﬁnitions, PPINOT also provides the possibility to extract the infor-
mation required to calculate PPI values from Activiti, an open source BP
management platform, and to create reports with these values.
Graphical deﬁnition of PPIs. PPINOT Tool Suite supports the graphical
deﬁnition of PPIs using a graph-based graphical notation that is easily un-
derstandable by non-technical users, at the same time that it is supported
by a metamodel that assures the precise and complete deﬁnition of PPIs.
Template-based deﬁnition of PPIs. PPIs can be deﬁned by fulﬁlling tem-
plates written in structured natural language, where the user only has to
properly introduce the missing information, assisted by linguistic patterns.
PPI deﬁnition mapping Graphical deﬁnition of PPIs can be mapped to their
corresponding templates in natural language.
Automated analysis of PPIs. The aforementioned analysis operations can
be automatically performed on PPI deﬁnitions.
References
1. del R´ıo-Ortega, A., Resinas, M., Cabanillas, C., Ruiz-Cort´es, A.: On the Deﬁni-
tion and Design-time Analysis of Process Performance Indicators. Information Sys-
tems 38(4), 470–490 (2012)
2. del-R´ıo-Ortega, A., Resinas Arias de Reyna, M., Dur´an Toro, A., Ruiz-Cort´es, A.:
Deﬁning process performance indicators by using templates and patterns. In: Barros,
A., Gal, A., Kindler, E. (eds.) BPM 2012. LNCS, vol. 7481, pp. 223–228. Springer,
Heidelberg (2012)
3. Decker, G., Overdick, H., Weske, M.: Oryx - an open modeling platform for the bpm
community. In: Dumas, M., Reichert, M., Shan, M.-C. (eds.) BPM 2008. LNCS,
vol. 5240, pp. 382–385. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

