Proceedings of the 2006 Winter Simulation Conference 
L. F. Perrone, F. P. Wieland, J. Liu, B. G. Lawson, D. M. Nicol, and R. M. Fujimoto, eds. 
 
ABSTRACT 
Supply chain transformation is an emerging service area in 
the market which aims at helping clients improve their op-
erational efficiency and reduce costs. As a generic tech-
nique for the analysis of complex and dynamic systems, 
simulation could play an important role in this field. This 
paper presents a case study showing how simulation could 
be the key enablement for a supply chain transformation 
project. A methodology and tool developed by IBM China 
Research Lab has been applied in this joint project with a 
world-class supplier of home improvement tools. By ap-
plying simulation, the client is provided an insightful view 
about their business processes and inventory allocation 
strategy, which serves as the basis for the transformation 
implementation. Financial results show that simulation has 
addressed the key issues and provided the client account-
able evaluation results for decision-making. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Supply chain transformation is an emerging service area in 
the market, which aims at helping clients transform their 
supply chain to a more flexible, responsive and resilient 
supply chain. Clients usually take transformation actions to 
improve their forecasting accuracy, reduce warehousing 
costs, improve on-time delivery, etc. Obviously, all trans-
formation initiatives are finally expected to help increase 
profitability in a short/medium/long term. However, in 
practice most supply chain transformation efforts focused 
on either the implementation of new IT systems or upgrad-
ing existing IT systems. These projects generally need con-
siderable investment and take much time to complete. Lit-
tle attention has been paid in the past to the optimization of 
existing supply chain operations from managerial point of 
view. However, such optimization efforts may help firms 
reduce costs and improve efficiency tremendously with a 
limited investment. For example, a periodic review and 
improvement of the inventory control policies for a manu-
facturing firm may help reduce its inventory carrying cost 
and improve its customer service level considerably with 
almost no investment on infrastructure and IT systems.  
In the field of supply chain transformation, models and 
techniques developed by academia, especially by experts 
from operations research, management science and indus-
trial engineering have a lot to offer. As a generic technique, 
simulation is very suitable for the analysis of complex and 
dynamic systems (Towill 1991). Considering this, IBM 
China Research Lab developed a supply chain transforma-
tion methodology and tool to help clients transform their 
supply chain using simulation and optimization as the core 
enabling techniques. In this paper, we present a case study 
to share our experiences from a transformation project with 
a world-class manufacturer, where simulation was used as 
the major enabling technique and demonstrated its great 
value.  
This study is conducted by IBM China Research Lab 
with two other industrial partners. One partner is a global 
leader in the design, manufacturing and sales of home im-
provement and construction products. As one of the lead-
ing manufacturers, the company maintains an expanding 
stable of well-established and fast growing brands. Accord-
ing to the product features and demand patterns, it works 
on a mixed basis with both original equipment manufactur-
ing (OEM) and original design manufacturing (ODM). In 
addition to OEM, ODM further provides the company 
flexibility in managing its product portfolio and helps it re-
act responsively to varying customer demands. However, 
how to control inventories along the supply chain and 
manage the raw material procurement processes at ODMs 
is still a quite challenging issue.  
In such an ODM scenario, the company would like to 
make a supply chain transformation effort and escalate its 
supply chain to a more cost-effective, responsive, and resil-
ient one. The objective of the project is to i) identify the 
best inventory-holding position with optimal control, and ii) 
evaluate the impact of central raw material procurement on 
supply chain performance.  
 
 
 
APPLYING SIMULATION IN A SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSFORMATION CASE 
 
 
Hongwei Ding 
Changrui Ren 
Wei Wang 
Jin Dong 
 
IBM China Research Lab 
Diamond Building, ZGC Software Park, Beijing 100094, P.R. China 
 
 
 
614
1-4244-0501-7/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
In the remainder of the paper, Section 2 gives a brief 
literature review of inventory control and process simula-
tion. The supply chain transformation project background, 
simulation model and numerical results are presented in 
Section 3. Some conclusions and perspectives are given in 
Section 4. 
2 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 Inventory Control 
Inventory management plays a key role in today’s business 
environment, since clients are more and more demanding 
about service level measures such as order cycle time, on-
time delivery rate, etc. Due to the complexity and stochas-
tic nature of modern supply chains, there are at least two 
good 
reasons 
to 
keep 
inventory 
for 
raw 
mate-
rial/component/final products in a manufacturing scenario. 
 
• 
Inventory could help reduce the sourcing time of 
various raw materials and work-in-process com-
ponents. For unplanned orders with large volume, 
a buffer stock could mitigate the negative impacts 
of capacity shortage on customer service level. 
• 
Holding inventories may help an enterprise 
achieve economies of scale by way of volume 
discounts and logistics consolidation with full 
truckloads. 
 
A variety of inventory control polices have been ex-
tensively studied, which are continuous or discrete, deter-
ministic or dynamic. Among those, some of the policies 
are adopted in industry to support daily business, including 
base stock, (R, Q), (s, S), etc.   
Two approaches are generally employed for inventory 
analysis, respectively analytical approach and simulation-
based approach. Each of the two approaches has its unique 
features and advantages. Analytical methods are very use-
ful in identifying the best position for inventory holding 
and the optimal setting of inventory control parameters 
(Zipkin 2000). But analytical models are often highly ab-
stract models of business processes for the sake of simplic-
ity and feasibility. However, to obtain detailed and accu-
rate results, one has to include a number of realistic 
features in the supply chain context.  
Compared to analytical methods, simulation-based ap-
proach has its specific advantages in providing an insight-
ful view of complex supply chains, especially in the pres-
ence of uncertainty and risk. Bhaskaran (1998) presented a 
simulation analysis of supply chain inventory and instabil-
ity. The impacts of various factors that amplify the dynam-
ics and instability have been studied. In (Petrovic et al. 
1998), the authors proposed several supply chain fuzzy 
models and a corresponding simulator to assist in decision-
making on operational parameters. Two sources of uncer-
tainty, customer demand and external supply of raw mate-
rial are interpreted and represented by fuzzy sets. But the 
modeling attention is focused on a supply chain with all 
facilities in a serial link. The customer demand is confined 
to a single product. Jansen et al. (2001) designed a simula-
tion model to quantify logistic and financial performances 
in alternative logistic scenarios for multi-compartment dis-
tribution in the catering supply chain. 
2.2 Process Modeling and Simulation 
Today, business process modeling has gained much atten-
tion from both academia and industry. A variety of defini-
tions of business process are available in the literature 
(Hammer and Champy 1993; Davenport and Short 1990). 
The authors (Hammer and Champy 1993) defined a busi-
ness process as “a collection of activities that takes one or 
more kinds of input and creates an output that is of value 
to the customer.” A business process is not the same as a 
business function. It may be contained within a departmen-
tal function. But most possibly a business process may 
cross several different departmental functions and bounda-
ries. For example, “order fulfillment” business process 
usually spans departments of call center, manufacturing, 
procurement, distribution and customer service. Business 
process re-engineering is about “fundamentally rethinking 
the radical re-design of business processes to achieve 
dramatic improvements in critical, contemporary measures 
of performance such as cost, quality, service and speed.” 
(Hammer and Champy 1993). Business process improve-
ment has a similar definition except that it usually takes a 
more smooth way rather than a radical approach.  
A complete business process model with a necessary 
level of granularity does give a clear landscape of a supply 
chain. Given the process model, simulation is a very useful 
means for its analysis. Process simulation is usually based 
on token flow semantics, which is described in UML2 su-
perstructure specification with details (UML 2005). In this 
paradigm, the simulation model is a sequence of processes, 
which fall into two categories: control processes and ex-
ecutable processes. During the simulation, tokens are gen-
erated by some processes, and then pass through the suc-
ceeding processes. When a token reaches a control process, 
the token is modified, copied, or directed to some selected 
processes. When a token reaches an executable process, the 
process is activated, and an instance of the process is cre-
ated and executed. Tokens are disposed at the end of the 
flow. Actually, general purpose simulation packages often 
use similar methods. Rockwell’s Arena is a typical imple-
mentation of token flow semantics (Altiok and Melamed 
2001).  
A number of commercial-off-the-shell (COTS) tools 
are available for business process modeling and analysis 
(Miers and Harmon 2005). Business process modeling is 
615
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
the commonly supported functionality. However, few of 
the tools provide functions beyond that, except some form 
of simulation capabilities at business process level. Hardly 
end users can use these tools directly to analyze supply 
chain problems such as inventory control. For details about 
the evaluation of different COTS tools, readers are directed 
to Miers and Harmon (2005) and Hall and Harmon (2005). 
3 
THE SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSFORMATION 
CASE 
3.1 Project Background 
The project is conducted at a home improvement manufac-
turer, which a leading supplier in the world. It has encoun-
tered some problems when dealing with unforeseen big-
volume customer demands. These orders are sometimes 
not fulfilled on time due to the long order-to-delivery cycle 
time at the ODM side. This might lead to order cancella-
tion, loss potential sales or additional cost for urgent deliv-
ery because of the usage of expensive express transporta-
tion. More importantly, it may reduce customer satisfaction 
level and cause negative influence to the brand image in 
the long run. According to our investigation, most ODMs 
do not hold buffer stock for raw materials, which is identi-
fied as the major reason for the long order-to-delivery time 
for ODMs. In this case, keeping some inventory of raw 
materials is a rather obvious approach to reduce the re-
sponse time to customer demands. However, due to the 
complexity of its operations, it is hard for the management 
team to locate the most appropriate position for inventory 
holding and to define the control policy. This is certainly 
an ideal place where OR/MS techniques could play a role. 
Given this understanding, the objective of this study 
was set to evaluate and most importantly to quantify how 
to setup buffer stocks at ODMs. According to the informa-
tion provided, we developed a quantitative approach using 
the simulation capability provided by our tool. The simula-
tion models and corresponding numerical results are pre-
sented in the following sections. Note that no real data is 
provided in this paper due to confidentiality.  
Besides the inventory optimization effort, another ob-
jective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and risk 
of applying centralized control model for raw material pro-
curement at ODMs. Currently the raw material procure-
ment process is locally managed at ODMs, out of the com-
pany’s management scope. However this sometimes results 
in product quality failures. So the company would like to 
first evaluate the possibility to setup a centralized pro-
curement system and secondly to establish the correspond-
ing business processes. The SCOR model (Supply-Chain 
Council 2006) was used for as-is process modeling and 
analysis. To-be processes were proposed according to the 
SCOR model, which ensured that the to-be processes 
would be aligned to best practice and could be easily 
benchmarked after their implementation. Due to space 
limitations, we focus on the presentation of the inventory 
optimization study in the following sections.  
3.2 Modeling  
3.2.1 Supply Chain Structure 
The structure of the supply chain under consideration is 
shown in Figure 1. There are three echelons comprising 
customers, the company, ODMs and ODMs’ tier-1 suppli-
ers. The two most critical customers are selected and mod-
eled, which represent the two largest revenue contributors. 
Two major ODMs are included as the product suppliers. 
Ten tier-1 suppliers of the two ODMs are identified and 
taken into consideration in this study.  
 
 
Figure 1: Supply Chain Network Model 
Three types of final product are studied in this case. 
Each has a one-level Bill-of-Material (BOM). Three types 
of raw materials are included, respectively blade, display 
box and user manual. Each has a different order-to-
delivery lead time, which is defined as the time period 
elapsed between the moment when a procurement order 
(PO) is issued from ODMs and the moment when corre-
sponding raw materials are received at ODMs. Blade has a 
much longer order-to-delivery lead time compared to the 
other two types. Accordingly, the inventory control policy 
for blade represents the major effort of our study.  
3.2.2 Business Process Mapping 
Given the supply chain structure, the end-to-end business 
process is shown in Figure 2, comprising four major sub-
processes. Each block in the figure represents a sub-
process, which consists of a series of activities. Two sub-
processes are depicted in Figure 3 and Figure 4. 
616
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
 
Figure 2: The End-to-End Process 
 
 
Figure 3: Order Fulfillment Process 
 
 
Figure 4: Order Receiving Process 
 
3.2.3 Operational Policy 
Since the manufacturing of all of the three products is out-
sourced to ODMs, assembly only takes place at ODMs 
where raw materials from tier-1 suppliers are transformed 
to final products. Assembly policies are defined as follows. 
In the as-is scenario, ODMs hold no buffer stock for raw 
materials or finished products. When procurement orders 
are sent to ODMs, ODMs issue POs to their tier-1 suppli-
ers directly. ODMs start assembly activities only when all 
BOMs are ready.  
To improve the as-is situation, the company suggested 
to introduce some base stock for raw materials at ODMs. 
Base stock policy with periodical review and replenish-
ment is assumed for inventory control. More specifically, 
the inventory position of raw materials is reviewed peri-
odically. Whenever the inventory position drops below a 
preset base stock level, a replenishment order is sent out, 
which brings the inventory position back to the base stock 
level. 
The limited production capacity of raw material sup-
pliers was identified as one of the major bottlenecks in this 
supply chain. Accordingly, the production capacity of RM 
suppliers is taken into consideration in a flexible and com-
plete way. The relationship between order quantity and 
supply leadtime could be specified using any formulation, 
rather than some restrictive assumptions such as a fixed 
617
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
daily production capacity. This gives the company the 
flexibility to define and evaluate its requirement on sup-
plier capacity in various ways.   
3.2.4 Performance Measures 
Three performance measures are defined in this study with 
respect to the scorecard provided by the SCOR model. 
These measures represent the performance attributes in 
term of responsiveness, reliability and cost. 
The first performance measure is order fulfillment cy-
cle time, representing a supply chain’s responsiveness. For 
each individual order in this study, the cycle time is calcu-
lated as the elapsed time between the release of a PO and 
the delivery of the corresponding products. 
The second performance measure is on time delivery 
rate representing a supply chain’s reliability. It is defined 
as the percentage of orders that were fulfilled on time, i.e. 
products delivered within the predefined target cycle time. 
The third measure is the average raw material inven-
tory level, an indicator to supply chain cost. It could be cal-
culated by the following formula:  
T
t
T
t
Inv
T
t
...,
,2
,1
,0
 
 ,
)
(
0
=
∑
=
, 
where Inv(t) is the inventory level at day t, T is the number 
of days for the time horizon. 
3.3 Data Collection and Numerical Results 
In general, for a supply chain transformation project, it is 
indispensable to have a good understanding of customer 
demands, as-is supply chain operations, and as-is perform-
ance. In this case, we’ve collected a variety of data, includ-
ing: 
 
• 
Customer demand history 
• 
Demand fulfillment process 
• 
Time and cost required for each process  
• 
Production policy used at each ODM 
• 
Order-to-delivery lead time of tier-1 suppliers 
 
 
Figure 5: History of Customer Demand for One Product 
Figure 5 shows the trend of customer demand for one 
product. We can easily discover that the customer demand 
fluctuates very much, which represents a big challenge to 
the company’s supply chain. Note that the real value is dis-
guised due to confidentiality but the demand fluctuation 
tendency remains as the same. 
Considering the high variability of customer demands, 
the simulation horizon was set as 5 years to cover supply 
chain dynamics. The warm-up period was set as 300 days, 
i.e. the simulation data was not taken into consideration 
until the simulation clock passed 300 days. Warm-up pe-
riod was used here in order to purge the simulation results 
and mitigate the impact of initial simulation environment 
setting on results.  
We have conducted a what-if analysis using the simu-
lation model with different parameter settings. Due to 
space limitation, only the result of one product type is 
shown and analyzed in the following.  
Figure 6 shows that the relationship between the order 
fulfillment cycle time and base stock level. As the base 
stock level increases, the order fulfillment cycle time de-
creases considerably. The figure clearly shows that the in-
troduction of buffer stock for raw materials at ODMs has a 
considerable impact on the reduction of the cycle time. In 
this case, the company would be much more responsive to 
customer demands. 
 
 
Figure 6: Order Fulfillment Cycle Time Decreases with 
Higher Base Stock Level 
 
As the base stock level increases, the company would 
benefit from the improvement of its rapid reaction to cus-
tomer demands. However, there is no free meal in the 
world. Figure 7 shows that the average raw material stock 
level gets higher as the base stock level increases. This 
means the inventory holding cost increases also. It is abso-
lutely not wise to set a too high base stock level. As the 
figure shows, with a lower base stock level, the average 
raw material stock level does not change much since the 
raw material supply lag far behind customer demands. 
With a higher base stock level, the stock level increases 
rapidly because of excessive raw materials supplied. Based 
on a what-if analysis using simulation, we’ve obtained the 
curve shown in Figure 7, where a sensitive area is identi-
618
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
fied with a base stock level from 12500 to 15000. Provided 
such a curve, the management team is able to determine 
the most appropriate parameter setting for inventory con-
trol at ODMs. 
 
 
Figure 7: Relationship between Base Stock Level and Av-
erage RM Stock Level 
 
Figure 8 shows the relationship between base stock 
level and on-time delivery rate. Based on our study, the on 
time delivery rate is very sensitive to the target cycle time. 
In this experiment, a unique target cycle time is set. How-
ever in practice, different order-to-delivery lead time is 
committed to different customers and for different prod-
ucts. More sensitivity analysis could be conducted to pro-
duce more insights for the management team when manag-
ing inventory. 
 
 
Figure 8: Relationship between Base Stock Level and On 
Time Delivery Rate 
3.4 Implication 
The analysis above clearly demonstrates the influences and 
correlation of introducing raw material buffers at ODMs. 
With the increase of raw material base stock level, the or-
der fulfillment cycle time will decrease considerably. On 
the other hand, it may also bring some negative impact to a 
firm if the base stock is kept at a wrong level, i.e., when 
the average raw material stock level increases, it will bring 
additional costs related to inventory holding, management 
cost, etc. 
Thus, keeping the right level of raw material inventory 
is critical to the firm and overall division profitability. This 
analysis provides an insightful view to another layer when 
the management team designs its buffer stock strategy at 
ODMs. A tradeoff between increased service level and ad-
ditional costs could be reached based on the quantitative 
analysis. 
4 
CONCLUSIONS 
For a successful supply chain transformation, it’s critical to 
understand clients’ business strength, setup an appropriate 
goal, use the right model, and conduct the necessary analy-
sis. Simulation is a technique which could help generate 
insights about transformation, evaluate the to-be scenario 
in a comprehensive context. Our study demonstrated that 
the methods and models developed by experts from opera-
tions research/management science may be of great help 
for supply chain transformation and therefore have a lot to 
offer in industry. 
5 
REFERENCES 
Altiok, T., and B. Melamed. 2001. Simulation Modeling 
and Analysis With Arena. Cyber Research Inc. and En-
terprise Technology Solutions, Inc. 
Bhaskaran, S. 1998. Simulation analysis of a manufactur-
ing supply chain. Decision Sciences, Vol.29, No.3, 
633-657. 
Davenport, T. H., and J. E. Short. 1990. The new industrial 
engineering: information technology and business 
process re-design, Sloan Management Review, Sum-
mer. 
Hall, C., and P. Harmon. 2005. The 2005 Enterprise Archi-
tecture, Process Modeling & Simulation Tools Report, 
BPTrends, 
April. 
Available: 
<http://www.bptrends.com>.  
Hammer, M., and J. Champy. 1993. Re-engineering the 
corporation: A Manifesto for business revolution, 
Harper Colllins, New York, USA. 
Jansen, D. R., A. Weert, A. J. M. Beulens, and R. B. M. 
Huirne. 2001. Simulation model of multi-compartment 
distribution in the catering supply chain. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 133, 210-224. 
Miers, D. and P. Harmon, “The 2005 BPM Suites Re-
ports”, 
BPTrends, 
March 
2005. 
Available: 
http://www.bptrends.com.  
Petrovic, D., R. Roy, and R. Petrovic. 1998. Modelling and 
simulation of a supply chain in an uncertain environ-
ment. European Journal of Operational Research, 
109, 299-309. 
Supply-Chain Council. 2006. SCOR version 7.0 overview 
[online]. Available via <http://www.supply-
chain.org> [accessed May 16, 2006]. 
619
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Ding, Ren, Wang, and Dong 
 
Towill, D. R. 1991. Supply Chain Dynamics, International 
Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Vol. 
4, no. 4, pp. 197-208. 
Unified Modeling Language: Superstructure, version 2.0. 
2005. Published at <http://www.omg.org/ 
cgi-bin/doc?formal/05-07-04>, August. 
Zipkin P. 2000. Foundations of Inventory Management. 
Irwin McGraw Hill, ISBN: 0-256-11379-3. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
HONGWEI DING is a Researcher at IBM China Re-
search Laboratory. He received his Ph.D. in Automation 
from INRIA (French National Institute of Computer Sci-
ence & Control), France. Before he joined IBM, he was a 
researcher at INRIA. His research interests include supply 
chain modeling, optimization and simulation. His email 
address is <dinghw@cn.ibm.com>. 
CHANGRUI REN is a Researcher at IBM China Re-
search Laboratory. He joined IBM Research in 2005 after 
receiving his Ph.D. degree in Control Science and Engi-
neering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, P. R. China. 
His research interests include supply chain management, 
logistics network design, performance management, and 
business process management. He is currently working on 
an end-to-end supply chain transformation methodology 
and tool. His e-mail address is <rencr@cn.ibm.com>. 
WEI WANG is a Researcher at IBM China Research 
Laboratory. He joined IBM Research in 2005 after receiv-
ing his master degree in Control Science and Engineering 
from Tsinghua University in Beijing, P.R. China. Currently, 
his research interests include supply chain simulation and 
optimization, performance management, and business 
process 
management. 
His 
email 
address 
is 
<wangwcrl@cn.ibm.com>. 
JIN DONG is the Manager of Supply Chain Management 
and Logistics research team in IBM China Research Labo-
ratory. He received his Ph.D. in Tsinghua University from 
China in 2001. Before he joined IBM, he was the Research 
Assistant Professor in Industrial Engineering Department 
of Arizona State University in USA. His email address is 
<dongjin@cn.ibm.com>. 
620
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

