117
 
978 1 5090 3720 9/16/$31 00 ©2016 IEEE
Optimization of the Business Processes Via 
Automatic Integration with the Document 
Management System 
 
Almir Djedović, Emir Žunić 
Info Studio Ltd, Sarajevo  
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
almir.djedovic@infostudio.ba 
emir.zunic@infostudio.ba 
 
 
 
Dino Alić, Samir Omanović, Almir Karabegović 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Sarajevo 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
alic.dino@gmail.com 
somanovic@etf.unsa.ba 
akarabegovic@etf.unsa.ba 
 
 
 
Abstract— In today's global business environment, the 
importance of customer service, cost-competitiveness, and quality 
are key factors in determining an organization's success, or 
undesirable failure. Organizations try to optimize their processes 
to maximize their profits and make the very process faster. Users 
usually work with documents in the process. Working with 
documents makes the process more slowly, since the documents 
are important to be scanned and attached to the form. This work 
presents the optimization of such processes. It is achieved by 
automatic integration of Business Process Management and 
Electronic Document Management Systems. Improvements and 
results achieved by proposed integration are presented in this 
research. The model that is created enables monitoring of defined 
Key Performance Indicators in the identification process of the 
bottlenecks in the process. The process can be optimized by 
increasing the number of resources on the activities that are a 
bottleneck in the process. Such a solution has been tested in the 
process of opening a bank account. 
Keywords—business process management; business process 
optimization; 
document 
management; 
process 
automation; 
simulation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Business Process Management (BPM) is a process-oriented 
management discipline [1]. Business Process Management is a 
top-down methodology designed to organize, manage, analyze, 
and reengineer the processes running in an organization. BPM is 
defined as a discipline “supporting business processes using 
methods, techniques and software to design, enact, control and 
analyze operational processes involving humans, organizations, 
applications, documents and other sources of information” [2]. 
This means that BPM is linked with areas of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) as Knowledge Management (KM), Knowledge 
Engineering (KE) and Business Intelligence (BI). 
In the last few years, with the upcoming of the “third wave” of 
BPM [3], the BPM lifecycle has been increasingly supported by 
a set of software technologies, which have been bundled 
together to a so called BPM System (BPMS) and procedures, 
change business rules without impact on other applications 
[4]. It means that processes involve collaboration individuals 
and/or groups. Companies which implemented Business Process 
Management are going to optimize their processes. Optimizing 
business processes results in: maximization of revenue and 
profitability, reduction of operational costs, customer service 
improvement, 
obsolescence 
and 
scrap 
reduction, 
risk 
management and compliance with policy and regulations. 
Today's companies, moving from traditional work with 
documents and aiming to overcome technical, financial and 
operational barriers, gravitate towards implementation of 
Electronic Document Management System (EDMS). Benefits of 
EDMS are widely known: increased document security and 
control, more reliable backups, lower document management 
and archiving costs, better version control, better knowledge 
management and search possibilities [5]. 
Combining these two systems together enables a connection 
between content and processes at all levels of the enterprise. The 
right information, to the right people, at the right time, is critical 
in business process optimization [6]. In our work we combine 
BPM with EDMS system and this combination helps to make 
better and faster business decisions. Currently there are solutions 
that integrate BPM and EDMS together such as [7, 8]. Most of 
the solutions force users to the solutions document systems 
which are often restrictive. A General idea of integrating 
management systems and workflow-based electronic document 
management is presented in [9]. The mentioned general idea 
contains these two systems and benefits from their integration in 
terms of the organizational aspect. Solution (DocFlow) which 
combines these two systems is presented in [10] simple 
workflow, along with the workflow approval, which is also 
included. This work goes a step further and automate tasks in 
process where users use documents from EDMS. When 
scanned, documents are automatically attached to the process. 
978-1-5090-3720-9/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
118
 
Also, this work uses simulation to improve business process by 
identified bottlenecks and presents data warehouse model to 
analyze results of business process. The latter is done by using 
Business Intelligence (BI) before and after automation, while 
this research aditionally shows how can processes be improved 
using BPM-EDMS-BI systems. 
This paper is structured as follows: BPM is discussed in general 
and an overview of BPM life cycle is given (see Sec. II). The 
idea of optimizing business processes with simulation, 
integration with EDMS system and automation of the steps 
where these two systems collaborate, and usage of data 
warehouse model to monitor process execution is presented in 
Section III. The idea is applied in financial service industry and 
the results are monitored using business intelligence. Evaluation 
is given by analyzing key performance indicators (KPI) before 
and after optimization (see Sec. IV). The paper ends with 
concluding remarks in Sec. V. 
II. 
BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT 
A Business Process is the complete and dynamically 
coordinated set of collaborative and transactional activities that 
deliver value to customers [3]. BPM system is a suite of 
software applications that enable the modeling, execution, 
technical and operational monitoring, and user representation 
of business processes and rules, based on integration existing 
and new information systems functionality that is orchestrated 
and integrated via services [11]. BPM can be viewed as 
continuous cycle comprising the following phases [12]: 
 Process identification. This the first phase where 
processes relevant to the problem are addressed. 
Sometimes this is done parallel with performance 
measure identification.  
 
Process discovery. This phase is also called as-is process 
modeling and here are current processes documented.  
 Process analysis. In this phase issues related to as-is 
process are identified, documented and quantified 
whenever it is possible. Simulation is often used to 
identify bottlenecks, resources needed in process and 
process cost [13]. 
 
Process redesign. The goal of this phase is to identify 
changes to the process that would help to address the 
issues from the previous phase and allow organization to 
meet its performance objective. 
 Process implementation. After analysis and redesign 
comes implementation where process developers 
perform tasks: data mapping and transformation, system 
fault handling, designing and implementing user 
interface, designing business rules, creating dashboards. 
 Process monitoring and controlling. Once the process is 
running, relevant data are collected and analyzed to 
determine how well is the process performing to the 
defined KPIs. New issues may then arise, and the cycle 
needs to be repeated on the continuous basis.  
The BPM Life Cycle helps to understand the role of technology 
in BPM. Technology in general, and especially in Information 
Technology (IT), is a key instrument to improve business 
process. However, to achieve maximum efficacy, system 
engineers need to be aware that technology is just one element 
for managing and executing processes. System engineers need 
to work together with process analysts in order to understand 
what main issues affecting a process, and how to best address 
these issues, be it by means of automation or by other means. 
III. 
AUTOMATIC INTEGRATION OF BPM AND EDMS SYSTEMS 
As mention above, before and after the implementation there 
is a way to improve process by using simulation. Simulation is 
widely applied technique in BPM because of its flexibility. 
Simulation is used for what-if analysis or the correctness of a 
new design is verified using model checking. The first step in 
the simulation is the estimation of the parameters of the 
simulation. Parameters are estimated by recording of the real 
process and they depend on the tools simulation is done in. 
These are the types of the parameters for the BPM Suite [14].  
 
The resource parameters: resource cost per hour, 
availability, efficiency and number of resources. 
 
Parameters of the initial activity: instances of the 
process are being generated and defined. There are 
following 
distributions: 
constant, 
uniform, 
exponential, normal and real. 
 
The activity parameters: there are two types of such 
parameters. The first type relates to the activities in 
the process involving the user: the distribution tasks 
are carried out in the process with the mean value and 
standard deviation, resources that can be shared, 
meaning, to be shared among numerous activities or 
fixed ones (in this case, it is important that the number 
of fixed resources is specified) and activity price ­ 
which may only be the price of the resource 
performing the activity or to include the additional 
cost (workplace cost). The second type refers to 
automatic activities where the number of threads is 
being specified which demonstrates the speed of 
finalizing the activity. 
 
Parameters of the gateway elements: it is important 
to specify the probability of the instance of the 
process that will be continued with each branch. 
The more precise simulation parameters, the better results will 
be. More precise results are achieved by methods such as: 
interviewing users involved in the process or by analysis of the 
files which contain information about already completed 
processes. Performances can be analyzed in three KPIs: time, 
price and the number of instances. For each of these KPIs, there 
is the cost analysis of resources and the activities in the process 
(Fig. 1.), and has two components: Resource busy cost and 
Resource total cost.  
In most business scenarios, there will be information exchange 
between users. Documents are often used to store necessary 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
119
 
information and they are often mandatory in process. In most 
cases, documents must be reviewed by a number of individuals 
before they can be approved and forwarded further. This can 
extend duration of business process and directly affects the cost 
of process, quality of service etc. Let's assume the documents 
are manually submitted from one to the other participant in the 
process. Usually, the users are not close to each other 
physically, they can be in different offices, different buildings 
or different states. Users are also usually involved in different 
processes, deciding to treat some tasks with greater priority. 
This results in forgetting to manage the tasks of a lesser priority 
and loosing these very documents in the process. Additionally, 
the duration of the process is being increased, while at the same 
time, the efficiency of the process becomes insignificant. It 
would be convenient if all the documents were gathered in one 
place and users, depending on their assigned rights and 
obligations, could perform their activities on these documents. 
This would result in avoiding the abovementioned problem of 
losing the documents in the process, reduction of the duration 
of the process and increased efficiency. This brings the idea of 
working with documents in electronic formats where the 
documents would be stored in the folder alike structures ­ 
introducing the Electronic Document Management.i iFoldersi 
iarei iorganizedi in iorder ito ireduce  
operating costs and shorten the time of searching through 
documents searching of documents [15]. One of the main 
advantages of the BPM and EDMS integration is that users 
during the filling of the electronic forms, where they are 
supposed to attach documents, do not attach the very 
documents, but the links to the documents located on a specific 
site in the organisation. This helps us to avoid the duplicaton od 
the documents in the system and the process is faster, because 
the time of the uploading of the documents is reduced. Users 
exchange links among themselves, but have the impression of 
exchanging the documents. 
Tracking data from activity checkpoints of unit transactions 
within an organization's business processes is an important data 
resource for business analysis and decision-makers to provide 
essential strategic and tactical business information. It's very 
important to know how processes are executed in real time. To 
analyze processes in real time we use Business Activity 
Monitoring. This technique allows us to measure various 
aspects such as time, cost, performance and many others [16]. 
To be able to monitor activities occurred in business process in 
detail and provide a good visibility for process monitoring there 
should be a good data warehouse model [17]. We created an 
activity warehouse model. This model contains an activity table 
and set of dimension tables as shown in Fig. 2. Activity table is 
structured as follow: 
Activity 
(ID, 
ProcessID, 
ActivityLabelID, 
RoleID, StatusID, OrganizationID. 
Dimension tables consist of dimensions like process, user, role 
and time.  
ActivityLabel 
(ActivityLabelID, 
Name, 
ActivityCost) 
Role (RoleID, Name, RoleCost, Description) 
Organization (OrganizationID, 
Name,Description) 
Status (StatusID, Name, Category) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We use this model to monitor real time execution of business 
process with business intelligence and business activity 
monitoring. 
All the optimization ideas of the business processes through the 
simulation, integration of the BPM and EDMS systems and real 
time monitoring are presented in the following chapter on the 
specific process from one of the banks in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
The idea of optimizing the business processes through the 
simulation and automatic integration with EDMS system is 
represented in the process of opening an account in a bank in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose name is omitted for 
anonymity.  
A. Problem description 
This process is chosen because it represents the process in 
which users work with documents: they scan, submit and 
control the documents, and it is a good example of the process 
that can be optimized as mentioned above. Fig. 3. shows the 
process of opening an account to legal entities. BPMN 2.0 
(Business Process Management Notation) standard was used 
for the presentation of the process and it is the world standard 
for business process modeling. The process begins when a 
client comes to the bank to open an account. The client submits 
an appropriate request for opening an account. After that, a loan 
officer collects the necessary documentation for opening an 
account. Another loan officer checks the completeness of the 
collected documentation. Then, they check if the client has 
already had an opened account status in the registry, and his 
account is registered. It is necessary to record if the contract is 
generated and sent to signing. When the client signs, the 
recording of the executed signing is made, as well as the 
account activation. In the end, it is necessary to record again if 
the original documents of the client have been received.  
 
 
Fig. 1. Resource Cost analysis in BPM 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
120
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Problem definition     
The performance of the process will be observed with two 
KPIs: process time execution and the total cost of the process. 
The execution time of the process for a single instance can be 
calculated as the sum of the time execution of all the activities 
in the process. This is also applied for the cost of the process. If 
there are n activities in the process, the time execution t and the 
cost c can be calculated in these relations (1) and (2): 
𝑡𝑡= ∑𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖
𝑛𝑛
𝑖𝑖=1
                                          (1) 
 
𝑐𝑐= ∑𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖
𝑛𝑛
𝑖𝑖=1
                                          (2) 
Where ti is the duration of the execution of i activity in the 
process, and ci the cost of the execution of i activity in the 
process. It is important to emphasize that the durations ti are 
mutually dependent. The duration of the execution of the 
current activity in the process depends on the duration of the 
execution of activities that come before analyzed activity, 
which can be presented through (3): 
𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖= 𝑓𝑓(𝑡𝑡1, 𝑡𝑡2, … , 𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖−2, 𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖−1)                         (3)  
For example, if we observe the activity Completeness check in 
the process in Fig. 3., this activity obviously depends on activity 
Collection of documents. Users can not perform their task in the 
process, until documentation is collected. They can also get 
documents for review when they are not at work, for example 
during the break or meeting. The duration of their performance 
of the activity will not be the same as in the case  when they are 
available to review the documentation promptly. In the process 
shown in Fig. 3. it is important to pay attention to Collection of 
documents activity. In this activity starts a connection with the 
EDMS system. In this part of the process, the users scan the 
documents, required for opening an Scanned documents are 
saved in the system and users attach  
 
 
 
 
these documents in electronic format to the process. The time 
this activity takes for execution, has 3 components (4): 
𝑡𝑡2 = 𝑡𝑡𝑠𝑠+ 𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑎+ 𝑡𝑡𝑑𝑑                                       (4) 
Where the ts time is necessary for scanning the documentation, 
ta time necessary for attaching the documents to the process, td 
time necessary for completing the task in the process (filling the 
appropriate fields in the form, etc.). Integration is achieved as 
described in the previous section. Documents are kept at a 
unique place in the system, and users in the process only submit 
links to the documents. This results in not occupying the 
additional space on disks and the process of the attachment of 
the documents is faster.  
C. Data 
Presented BPM and EDMS systems integration is realized at the 
application level via links (Fig. 4.). BPM and EDMS use 
separate databases. BPM database stores the information about 
the process, users etc. and EDMS database stores documents and 
information about the metadata documents. Data are 
obtainedifromitheidatabaseiwhichiregistersiand 
stores 
all 
occurrences of the process. Occurrences contain information 
about: unique instance number of the process, event (activity), 
type of event (started or completed), time of event and about the 
user who is involved in the process. This kind of integration is 
implemented in the process shown in Fig. 3. In order to monitor 
performances of the process, data warehouse model is defined 
(Fig. 2.). Using the model with the help of dimensions 
ActivityLabelID i Duration we can get the information 
on the duration of each activity in the process. Also using the 
dimensions 
ActivityLabelID, 
ActivityCost 
and 
RoleCost we can get the information about the cost of the each 
performed activity in the process. As mentioned in Section 3., 
the cost of performing the activity includes the cost of the 
workplace and the cost of the person performing this task. These 
documents are sufficient for the analysis of the process by two 
different KPIs: duration of execution of the process and the total 
cost of the process. After defining the data warehouse model, we 
can continue with the analysis of the process execution. Results 
are shown in Fig. 5. The analysis was conducted in the period of 
15 days. Fig. 5. shows the total execution time for each activity 
in the process. Fig. 5. also shows that Collection of the 
documents activity has the longest execution time of more than 
one day. This means, the instances of the process are most 
retained during the collection of the documents and this is where 
is the bottleneck in the process. Retaining the process instances 
in this activity directly influences the retaining in other activities 
following this one according to relation (3). After this activity, 
the process retains the most in the activities Completeness check 
and Checking account status in the registry. The activity 
Collection of documents, which is a bottleneck in the process is  
 
 
Fig. 2. Data warehouse activity model 
 
Fig. 3. Process of opening an account to legal entities 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
121
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at the same time the place where the integration with EDMS 
have been realized. The execution time of this activity has 3 
components according to relation (4). In order to optimize the 
process, it is necessary to reduce the execution time of that 
activity. The only component of the time that can be affected is 
𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑎. The component 𝑡𝑡𝑠𝑠 is the scanning time and cannot be 
eliminated, because it is necessary to scan the documents in 
order for them to be available in electronic form, as well as the 
time 𝑡𝑡𝑑𝑑, because the user has to examine filled fields in the form, 
and possibly fill some of them. The execution time of the 
collection of documents 𝑡𝑡2 will be reduced by minimizing the 
component 𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑎. The measured results of proposed solution of the 
optimization is shown in Fig. 6. Instead of existing integration 
at the application level, integration at the database level was 
presented. The system now uses one database instead of two. 
User is no longer obligated to scan the document and submit it 
again in the form. Now the system works in a instances of the 
process as one of metadata. This data is sufficient for the system 
to recognize the instance at the level following manner: after the 
documents are scanned, those documents (more precisely: links 
to the documents) are automatically attached to the 
corresponding instance of the process. The automatic integration 
is achieved when the user, during the scanning of the documents 
inserts the number of instances of database, and to join links to 
the instance (links that lead to the newly scanned documents). 
Thus, the users do not have to attach documents at 𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑎= 0. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Result 
Fig. 7. shows the time analysis of the automated process in the 
same period of 15 days. The process acceleration is even faster, 
considering the fact that Collection of documents activity is 
performed by 14 users. It is obvious that the proposed solution 
is improved, in other words, the time execution of the Collection 
of the documents activity is reduced. This also causes the 
reduction of the execution time as well as other activities in the 
process following after the Collection of the documents activity. 
The total cost of the process is reduced too, because the cost of 
the process depends on execution time of activities in process. 
Fig. 7. shows that the bottleneck is in the process on the 
Completeness check activity. For the further optimization of the 
process the implementers suggest to increase the number of the 
users performing the activity in the Completeness check. 
Currently, the number of users performing this activity is 2. 
Increasing the number of the users can result in increasing the 
cost of the resources in that activity, because workers cost more. 
On the other hand, the execution time of the very process will be 
reduced as well as the total cost of the process. It is profitable to 
increase the number of users if the reduction in prices of the 
process will be higher than the increase of prices by adding new 
participants to the process. Simulation shows that the cost of the 
process decrease by 8%, with over 10000 to 9200 unit prices 
(Fig. 8.). The total cost of the process takes 
 
 
Fig. 4. BPM and EDMS system integration 
 
 
Fig. 5. The total time of activities duration in process 
 
 
         Fig. 7. The entire time execution of the activity in the process after the 
automatic integration BPM and EDMS systems 
Fig. 6. Automatic integration of BPM and EDMS systems 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
122
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into account the cost of resources and the cost of jobs, and 
depends on the execution time of the process. Increasing the 
number of resources regardless of the simultaneous increase of 
the cost of resources, decreases the total time of the execution of 
the process on every activity and will cause decreasing of the 
cost of the entire process. The results of the simulation are 
presented to the bank which will further decide on the proposal 
of the optimization.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper shows the processes that can be optimized in 
which users work with the documents. The presented idea of 
optimization includes the automatic integration of BPM and 
EDMS systems. During the scanning, the documents are 
automatically being attached to the appropriate instance of the 
process, which helps users to avoid manual attaching of the 
documents in the form. In this way, time of the process 
implementation and price of process, too, were reduced. Larger 
number of places for integration BPM and EDMS systems in 
process, mean greater improvement of process. This approach 
is comprehensive, and can be used in any process. Solving the 
problem of bottleneck in the process on one activity is reflected 
on all other activities in the process. It has also been 
demonstrated by simulation that the increasing of the number 
of the resources on the bottleneck in the process results in 
reduction of the cost of the overall process, no matter of the 
resource price increase. This improvement has been achieved 
because the total duration of the process is effectively reduced. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.K.L. Ko, “A computer scientist’s introductory guide to business process 
management (BPM),”  ACM Crossroads, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 11–18, 
Summer 2009.    
[2] W.M.P. van der Aalst, A.H.M. ter Hofstede, and M. Weske, “Business 
process management: A survey,” in Proc. Business Process Management: 
International Conference, BPM 2003, Eindhoven, the Netherlands, ser. 
LNCS. Springer, June 26-27, 2003, pp. 1–12. 
[3] H. Smith and P. Fingar, Business Process Management. The Third Wave. 
Meghan-Kiffer, US, 2003.      
[4] S. Cleveland. (2016, January, 14). BPM from a Business Point of View, 
business process management, Greatest Benefit from BPM. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.ebizq.net/blogs/bpm_business . 
[5] P. Fenton. (2016, January, 20) 10 Benefits of Moving to Electronic  
Document Management System (EDMS). [Online]. Available:  
         http://blog.montrium.com/blog/10-benefits-of-moving-   
         to-electronic-document-management-for-life-science-  
         companies 
[6] G. Paradapakis, Business Process Management with Document and 
Content Management. IBM United Kingdom, 2010.        
[7] Xerox Document Management. (2016, February, 3). [Online]. Available: 
http://www.realbusiness.com/#/documentmanagement/service-offerings-
dm      
[8] HP. (2016, February,f3). JetAdvantage solutions for workflow 
management.b[Online].vAvailable:fhttp://www8.hp.com/us/en/solutions
/business-solutions/printingsolutions/workflow.html.       
[9] H.T. Pho and T. Tambo, “Integrated management systems and workflow-
based electronic document management: An empirical study,” Journal of 
Industrial Engineering and Management (JIEM), pp. 194-217, 2014.        
[10] B. Yimwadsana, C. Chaihirunkarn, A. Jaichoom, and A. Thawornchak, 
“DocFlow: An Integrated Document Workflow for Business Process 
Management,” Interntaional Journal of Digital Information and  Wireless 
Communications (IJDIWC), pp. 219-229, 2011.  
[11] P. Ravesteyn, R. Betenburg, and B.D. Waal. “In Search of Competencies 
Needed in BPM Projects,” Communications of the IIM, vol 8(2), pp. 23-
30, 2008.           
[12] M. Dumas, M.L. Rosa, J. Mendling, and H.A. Reijers, Fundamentals of 
Business Process Management. Springer. New York, U.S., 2013.   
[13] G. Hook, “Business process modeling and simulation,” in Proceedings of 
the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference, Winter 2011.  
[14] Oracle Corporation, Modeling and Implementation Guide for Oracle 
Business Process Management. U.S., 2013.   
[15] K. Neal. “Driving better business performance with document 
management processes,” The Information Management Journal vol. 42, 
no. 6, pp. 48-49, Winter 2008.  
[16] Oracle Corporation, Monitoring Business Activity with Oracle BAM. 
U.S., 2015. 
[17] O. Mangisengi, M. Pichler, D. Auer, and D. Draheim. “Activity 
warehouse: Data management for business activity monitoring”. in 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Enterprise 
Information Systems, vol. DISI, June 2007 
 
Fig. 8. The entire time execution in the process are minimized after the 
automatic integration BPM and EDMS systems 
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

