1 
 
A three-step methodology for process-oriented performance: How to 
enhance automated data collection in healthcare 
 
KAAT DE POURCQ1, PROF. DR. PAUL GEMMEL2, DR. IR. BEN DEVIS3, JAN VAN 
OOTEGHEM4, TOM DE CALUWÉ4, PROF. DR. JEROEN TRYBOU5 
1 Department of Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Service management, Ghent University, 
Tweekerkenstraat 2 9000 Ghent Belgium, Tel. +32 9 264 34 93, Kaat.depourcq@ugent.be 
(corresponding author) 
2 Department of Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Service management, Ghent University, 
Tweekerkenstraat 2 9000 Ghent Belgium, Tel. +32 9 264 35 18 
3 H.Essers, Transportlaan 4 3600 Genk Belgium Tel. +89 32 32 32 
4 Amaron, Kapellestraat 13, 8755 Ruiselede, Tel. +32 51 62 73 20  
5 Department of Public Health, Ghent University, De Pintelaan 183 9000 Ghent Belgium, Tel. 
+32 9 332 83 57 
 
Keywords: Process management, Performance measurement, Hospitals, Quality 
 
Running head: Process-oriented performance in healthcare  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Background. Healthcare managers often attempt to enhance process-oriented performance. 
However, this remains a challenge. New approaches aimed at increasing the implementation 
success of process-oriented performance measurement should be investigated. 
Methods. This study investigates and discusses a step-by-step methodology to implement an 
automated and effective process-oriented performance measurement system in a hospital. The 
methodology is based on a framework for developing dashboards based on three steps: the 
demand side, supply side, and the fit between the two. An illustrative case of the process of hip 
surgery in the operating room of two hospitals is used.  
Results. A methodology is developed to define a reliable set of process-oriented performance 
metrics, allowing analysis and management of the different flows in healthcare in an integrated 
way, and by investigating several methods to automatically integrate the data gathered into a 
reporting infrastructure than can be used to disseminate the results.  
Conclusion. This step-by-step methodology allows healthcare organizations to develop and 
implement effective process-oriented performance measurement in an automated way. This 
allows the alignment of the goals of hospital management and various stakeholders with the 
more analytical analysis of business process management notation and hospital information 
system data.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Background 
In the last decade, hospitals have tried to move from functional to more process-oriented 
organizational forms [1]. The process orientation of organizations results in improvements in 
process flow, quality, costs, financial performance, and customer satisfaction [2]. To 
simultaneously increase the efficiency and quality of their operations, hospitals are investing in 
process management and process optimization [3]. However, there is still an absence of clear 
process thinking in many hospitals, as well as a lack of knowledge about how to identify and 
monitor these processes using performance indicators [4]. 
Following Porter et al. [5], two main types of processes can be identified in hospitals. First, 
there is the actual “treatment”, with the aim of caring for or curing patients; this includes all 
medical and clinical activities related to diagnosis, therapy, surgery, and other care. The 
treatment process is the primary flow and shapes the patient flow. Second, there are 
“supporting” processes to reinforce the “treatment”, including all nontreatment processes, like 
logistic flow and information flow. These flows use different resources, like staff, equipment, 
and materials. Process-orientation within a hospital assumes an integrated view of logistical, 
information, and patient flows [6]. Current processes in healthcare must be modified to better 
coordinate, align, and synchronize different flows and resources (e.g., staff, equipment, and 
materials). Ultimately, this should result in a more efficient patient-centric workflow [7]. The 
current tendency towards accreditation and certification in the healthcare sector endorses this 
need and reinforces process management [8].  
There are some challenges in developing process-oriented performance measurement 
systems in hospitals. First, most performance measures in hospitals are not process-oriented [4] 
and cannot assist healthcare systems to synchronize patient, logistical, and information flows. 
4 
 
Second, different stakeholders have an impact on the performance of different flows in the 
system [9], resulting in a variety of potential performance indicators. Having a reliable method 
to define performance metrics that can monitor and steer different healthcare flows is therefore 
an important challenge. Third, more and more data is available in hospitals [10]. The integration 
of large amounts of raw healthcare data across several dimensions remains a huge challenge 
[11]. As the interoperability of systems and data storage is still insufficient [12], it is a challenge 
to capture and organize data to support and improve decision-making. This creates 
opportunities to develop process-oriented performance measures based on existing databases. 
Data can thus be collected in an automated way, making implementation of process-oriented 
performance management systems more feasible. 
In this study, we overcome these challenges by proposing a step-by-step methodology for 
defining a reliable set of process-oriented performance metrics, allowing analysis and 
management of the different flows in healthcare in an integrated way, and by investigating 
several methods of automatically integrating data into a reporting infrastructure for 
dissemination, permitting implementation of process-oriented performance measurement in 
hospitals. This will help hospital managers to achieve a process orientation while integrating 
patient, logistical, and information flows. 
 
The three-step methodology 
Organizations are dealing with an increasing amount of data. It is a therefore a challenge to 
capture and organize these data to support and improve decision-making. The problem of 
information overload can be managed using interactive visual information displays to support 
decision-making by implementing key performance indicators (KPIs) in a dashboard [15]. KPIs 
are “quantifiable metrics which reflect the performance of an organization in achieving its goals 
and objectives” [16]. A dashboard brings the organization’s KPIs into a single display and aims 
5 
 
to visualize them in order to increase understanding of performance [17]. Commonly, only a 
relatively small number of interconnected key performance metrics and underlying 
performance drivers reflect both short-term and long-term goals throughout the organization 
[18].  
We employ the conceptual framework of Pauwels et al. [19] to develop a dashboard for hip 
surgery patients in the operating room (OR) of the two hospitals. Pauwels et al. [19] discuss the 
importance of the relationship between the demand and the supply side of dashboards. Our 
methodology (Fig. 1) develops practical steps to investigate the demand and supply sides and 
provides a method for fitting the two.  
 
Insert fig. 1 about here 
Figure 1. A step-by-step methodology for developing a dashboard 
 
Step one: the demand side of the dashboard 
In the first step, we investigate and visualize the demand side of the dashboard. The demand 
side represents the users of the dashboard, including hospital senior management as well as 
process owners and participants, such as coordinating physicians, department heads, head 
nurses, physicians, and nurses [20]. It is crucial that managers consider the opinion of these 
different stakeholders in developing KPIs for the demand side [19, 21]. Different professional 
groups have their own incentives, and conflicts among these groups can result in the 
continuation of suboptimal systems. To avoid suboptimal systems, vertical alignment and 
horizontal integration are aimed for. Vertical alignment means that the key performance metrics 
must reflect the vision and strategic goals of the hospital [20]. Second, activities across 
organizational units should be visualized by measuring the performance and interplay of the 
upstream process of the patient with the downstream supporting processes—i.e., horizontal 
6 
 
integration [22].  
 
Step two: The supply side of the dashboard 
It is important to link the process-oriented data from information systems to the KPIs using a 
bottom-up approach. Process-orientation in hospitals implies that we know how processes are 
operated in the organization and what process data is available [19, 28]. In our framework, this 
is represented by the supply side. To obtain this goal, we explored the processes in the OR for 
the total hip replacement procedure. A detailed business process management study was 
performed on patient flow and the various supporting logistics and information flows in each 
hospital.  
Step three: Fit between demand and supply side 
The fit between demand and supply is critical for successfully implementing dashboards [30, 
31]. The type of information provided should match with the decision responsibilities for 
various users and the metrics in the dashboard should be those that are crucial for hospital 
management goals (demand side). There are still many technical challenges and difficulties in 
integrating dashboards with legacy systems and the applications that feed data into them [10]. 
 
Methods 
This study’s objective is to develop and investigate a step-by-step methodology for 
implementing a process-oriented performance measurement system in hospitals. We use an 
illustrative case study [13] from the operating room (OR), which is a key hospital resource, as 
60%–70% of all hospital admissions are induced by pathologies requiring surgical intervention 
[14]. Denton et al. [14] state that the OR is the largest cost center and greatest source of revenue 
for most hospitals. The study was conducted in two hospitals: the first has 822 beds, 2300 
7 
 
employees, and 220 physicians; the second has 554 beds, 1600 employees, and 170 physicians. 
The study was approved by the medical ethics committees at the hospitals and at the University 
Hospital of Brussels. All participants gave informed consent for participation in the research. 
As the study aims to develop a step-by-step methodology, data collection was conducted in 
three different steps using diverse methods.  
Data collection 
Data collection for the demand side 
To collect data for the demand side a qualitative study was carried out. First, a systematic 
literature review was performed to develop a list of indicators for the structured interviews. To 
do this, we updated the results of the systematic review of Liu [23], who analyzed KPIs in 
articles published to 2012 in PubMed and PubMed Central. Liu [23] compiled a list of 66 
indicators.  
We applied the same selection criteria and searched PubMed from June 2012 to April 2014. 
Since the focus of this study is the operation room and the hip surgery process, we also included 
the following terms: “THP or total hip replacement or hip arthroplasty or hip surgery” and 
“Operating room or Operation room or OR”. Based on the results of our systematic review, 
seventy-two additional indicators were added. Thereafter, the list was revised by two experts 
and a pilot interview was carried out with a surgeon. The resulting list contained 138 KPIs. 
Second, participants were selected by contacting representatives of the hospital 
management. Sixteen qualitative semi-structured interviews were executed. Yigitbasioglu and 
Velcu [10] argue that KPIs should be developed and monitored at different levels in the hospital, 
depending on the goal and needs of specific users. We hence incorporated the views of different 
users and actors from the multiple disciplines (Table 1) involved in hip surgery cases at the two 
hospitals.  
8 
 
 
Table 1. Overview of the interviewees 
Insert table 1 about here 
The interview contained two phases:  
Part 1: Semi-structured interview. Questions were asked about which performance indicators 
were measured in the hospital and the usefulness and importance of these indicators—for 
example, “Which performance indicators are already measured in your organization?”  
Part 2: Structured interview. This part was performed by presenting KPIs to the interviewees 
on cards. The structured part of the interview was fed with a list of 138 KPIs based on the 
extensive literature review and consisted of three steps:  
First, participants were asked to select all the indicators they thought important to monitor; they 
were asked to explain why they found these KPIs important. Next, they were requested to select 
the 20 KPIs that they perceived to be most important to measure and follow up on. Finally, they 
were given the task of reducing the list to 10 KPIs.  
The recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using NVivo 10. The data 
were content-analyzed for emergent themes using the framework approach of Ritchie and 
Lewis [24]. We used the content of the interviews and of the three rounds of selection of the 
KPIs to decide which KPIs should be integrated in the dashboard. The ranking was performed 
across all interviews. First, we added the number of times a KPI was selected by the participants 
in each round. Second, we wanted to allocate more value to the final two rounds, considering 
that participants had to eliminate KPIs in the second and third round. Hence, we multiplied the 
number of times a KPI was selected by three for the third round, and by two for the second 
round. We then added up these scores to get an overall mark per KPI. Next, we ranked the KPIs 
top down and drew up a comparison between the two hospitals. An overall list was thus 
developed. Considering that the number of indicators monitored by a dashboard needed to be 
9 
 
manageable, we decided to retain 20 KPIs in the overall list. This is comparable with the 
healthcare literature, where the number of KPIs ranges from 10 to 30.  
 
Liu and Itoh [25] created a list of 27 outcomes, and 24 KPIs were measured in the research of 
Harris et al. [26]. However, Shohet [27] used only 11 KPIs.  
Data collection for the supply side.  
To analyze the patient flow, we based the exploration of the process on a document analysis 
focused on existing standards in healthcare: the clinical pathway. Thereafter, three interviews 
were carried out; two nurses and one nurse practitioner were questioned. Several process steps 
were explored and, at each step, interviewees were asked which tasks needed to be performed 
to move to the next step.  
Twenty-one group interviews were organized at each hospital to outline the supporting 
flows. The interviewees were employees carrying out surgery or managing resources (such as 
skills, equipment, and material). The exploration of logistic flows was based on the bifurcation 
of different types of critical resources identified. The logistic flows can be decomposed using a 
decomposition list—a check-list of subprocesses that are “common” in most industries. Several 
questions were asked, like “Which activities are executed in these subprocesses? When and 
how are these activities executed? How frequent are these activities executed?” For each 
resource type, a decomposition list was filled out in a textual manner. The decomposition list 
also allowed identification of information flows.  
The alignment of the different processes was then investigated. To identify the level of 
integration for supporting flows (logistics and information) and the patient flow, we linked the 
upstream patient flow with supporting logistic flows by determining whether the patient flow 
is steered by the supporting flows. The next step evaluated which data were already available 
10 
 
in the hospital information system (HIS) to measure the performance of the process-oriented 
KPIs identified in the demand-side analysis. Data and databases were investigated on the basis 
of results from the interviews, observations, and document analysis. An information technology 
(IT) expert was also consulted to explore the interoperability of the systems, though this could 
be an IT expert from the hospital. 
Data collection for the fit between demand and supply side.  
A focus group of several experts was organized to discuss which data and processes could be 
linked to KPIs. The focus group contained an IT specialist from the industry, three IT 
researchers, one researcher and one professor in healthcare operations management, one 
hospital manager and one PhD in logistics management. The goal of the focus group was to  
bring the demand and supply sides of the framework together.  
 
Results 
Demand-side 
The results of the demand-side show discrepancies in the perspectives of the two hospitals. 
Depending on the different strategic and tactical goals within hospitals, participants selected 
different indicators and proposed different rankings. Table 2 presents the 29 KPIs chosen by 
either hospital 1 or hospital 2. Hospital 1 tended to focus more on costs and efficiency, while 
hospital 2 had more clinical outcomes in their top ten KPIs. Less than 50% of the indicators 
selected by hospital 2 were also in the ranking of the twenty most important indicators for 
hospital 1.  
 
Table 2: Ranking and comparison of the most important KPIs for each hospital 
Insert table 2 about here 
11 
 
 
Using a qualitative research design enabled the researchers to gain a more in-depth view into 
the reasons for the selection of the KPIs. This enhanced the ranking of KPIs. There are not only 
differences between hospitals; differences also exist between professional groups. Physicians, 
head nurses, and the medical OR managers tended to focus dominantly on the patient 
perspective, contrary to administrative and nursing OR management, who focused more on 
efficiency. Our analysis shows that participants selected indicators that measure supporting 
processes, as well as treatment processes. 
Since there is a difference between these hospitals in the selection and ranking of KPIs, this 
study suggests that each organization should investigate which KPIs are to be included in the 
dashboard, depending on the goals of the hospital and stakeholders. Moreover, since different 
stakeholders within the organization prioritize different KPIs, hospital managers should include 
the perspectives of different stakeholders and use a methodology, such as that is described in 
the previous section, to find a consensus. 
Supply side 
To collect data for the supply side, the patient flow and various supporting logistics and 
information flows were mapped. 
Describe the patient flow.  
In a first step, we examined the treatment process that shapes patient flow (Fig. 2). The flow of 
a patient undergoing total hip replacement is determined mainly by the clinical pathway. 
Clinical pathways are tools for guiding evidence-based healthcare [29]. Gathering data from 
clinical standards gives insight into several procedures and registration policies in the patient 
process, like surgical safety checklists, pain protocols, and preoperative interventions. The flow 
can have various statuses: A patient passes through different statuses during the entire treatment 
12 
 
process. Several tasks should be performed before the patient can move to the next  
status. For example, before gaining the “admission” status, the patient should be informed and 
examined. This status involves several necessary tasks. First, patients receive information from 
the surgeon, anesthesiologist, physiologist, and social service worker. Second, a preanesthesia 
investigation is performed: X-ray, ECG, screening of nosocomial infection, and a blood test. 
Third, an informed consent form and an information brochure are distributed. 
 
Insert fig. 2 about here 
Figure 2. The patient process 
 
Identify and describe logistic and information flows.  
We identified thirteen different logistic flows for the delivery of materials from supplier to the 
OR (Table 3). Other important resources were found to be the nurses, head nurses, and 
physicians. The OR and sterilized equipment were identified as critical equipment for surgery.  
 
Table 3. Product categories of logistic flows 
Insert table 3 about here 
 
The unregistered sterile material process is discussed as an example (Fig. 3). First, the 
logistic flow is described. The supplier delivers unregistered sterile material to an external 
company’s central distribution point. From there, these are delivered to the OR by different 
types of processes. Some of these materials are stored in the ORs, others are stored on other 
locations i.e. storage location outside the OR. The replenishment of these storage locations is 
based on various information flows. A min–max SAP warehousing management system 
13 
 
replenishes the platform. The storage location outside the OR is replenished using a Kanban 
system (empty bins are scanned) [41] and replenishment of the ORs is based on handwritten 
order lists.  
 
Insert fig. 3 about here 
Fig. 3 Logistical process of the non-registered sterile products 
 
This also occurs in the twelve other logistic flows. A different number of logistics and 
information flows exist to supply the OR. For example, sometimes the supplier delivers directly 
to the OR, as with infusion therapy, prosthesis in consignation and borrowed prosthesis, 
stitching materials, nonstorage materials, and sterile products (custom packs). General 
medication, opiates, and registered sterile products go through the pharmacy and the external 
platform is used as an intermediate storage for sterile unregistered materials and disposables. 
Automated data collection for supplies, consumption, and storage is limited to two programs in 
the hospital (Infohos and SAP). SAP is used for processes that pass through the external 
platform and for the stitching-material and sterile-product (custom-pack) processes. The 
Infohos database is used when intermediate storage is at the pharmacy. Replenishing the 
pharmacy and external platform is managed using data on consumed materials and the stock 
levels. However, SAP can only register processes and costs before products leave the 
intermediate storage. Replenishment of medication is based on the number of consumed 
products registered in Infohos. Consumed medication is registered by hand in Infohos directly 
or in a paper file. The interoperability of these systems remains insufficient. These examples 
illustrate that supporting flows (information and logistics) in OR are very complex and costly 
processes that remain unaligned.  
14 
 
Level of integration of supporting and patient flows.  
There are only two logistic flows driven by the patient process: OR planning and prosthesis 
ordering (Fig. 2). Three moments of interaction occur: when the decision is made that surgery  
is necessary, after informing and examining the patient, and at the moment of surgery. First, 
the decision to perform surgery is made: the two resources (prosthesis and OR) are released and 
confirmed. The information flow between the supporting and the patient processes is very 
important for these two resource types; however, it is neither followed-up nor automated. No 
other logistic flows are driven by the patient process. The first and only link for the other logistic 
flows was at the moment of interaction, at the moment resources were released in the 
preoperative phase. This means that the planning of logistic flows is not linked to patient flow, 
which should be the “trigger” for these processes. This methodology shows that both the 
supporting flows and the patient flow should be evaluated to obtain an overall view of the 
processes, as integration of flows is limited. By automating data collection and enhancing 
information flow, the alignment of the different flows can be improved.  
Evaluate available data.  
The following step evaluated which data were already available in HIS for measuring the 
performance of the process-oriented KPIs identified in the demand-side analysis. Much patient 
flow data had already been gathered, like data in patient files, data on clinical pathways, data 
from the OR planning tool. Generally, data collection was required for clinical reasons and 
some was done by hand. Employees were not always informed of the goals of data collection, 
which made it more complicated for them to collect and register the data correctly. Furthermore, 
most of the data collected in the hospital was not process-oriented and even when there was 
process data available in the HIS, it was hard to use the data since it was not saved in a structured 
way.   
15 
 
Logistical information was also available (e.g., SAP, Infohos), but there was no integration 
with patient flow data, and most information was still not connected to the hospital-wide 
information system. The evaluation of the available data shows that much information on 
supporting flows is scattered over various IT systems and software. Moreover, many procedures 
in healthcare are still registered on paper—e.g., pain procedures, surgical safety checklists, 
preoperative checks. 
 
The fit between demand and supply side: Integration of KPIs in the dashboard 
Automated data collection in dashboards improves compliance with best practices and 
evidence-based medicine and management [32]. Hence, the goal in this phase was to find a 
method to enhance automated data collection for process-oriented indicators. Existing 
techniques and procedures should be adopted to integrate process-oriented data into the 
dashboard. Two different approaches for such integration can be identified. 
A first approach is to feed real-time generated data directly into a dashboard. Some KPIs are 
registered in the HIS and may be linked directly to the dashboard. These are often KPIs that the 
government requires reports on. Examples include incidence of decubitus, number of 
readmissions, nosocomial infections, and number of hospitalization days. There are also many 
KPIs indicated as important by the interviewees which do not need to be reported: number of 
surgeries performed by a surgeon, duration of surgery per physician, occupancy of the 
orthopedic department and OR, and sickness absence. Currently, all this data is available in the 
HIS; however, it is not available in a structured way. Most indicators are followed up on a 
hospital or department level and are not linked to specific clinical procedures or supporting 
processes. Consequently, it is hard to track down problems and follow up the performance of 
treatment processes. Making data more visual on a process level, as illustrated by our 
methodology, will result in the easier follow-up of process data and will improve outcomes. 
16 
 
The second approach is to use a business-process management notation application (BPMN) 
combined with data from the HIS. To our knowledge, this is a new approach to integrating 
process-oriented performance indicators into healthcare measurement systems. Several 
process-oriented KPIs, such as the surgical safety checklist, performance evaluation of 
employees, pain management, correct bills of materials, and correct preoperative screening 
consist of small tasks that must be performed in the correct order, in the legitimate way, and at 
the proper moment. Current procedures in hospitals are registered in paper files. The focus 
group suggested a new approach of importing these data into the HIS. BPMN should be applied 
to outline these process-oriented KPIs. Thereafter, the new process information allows the 
representation of clinical procedures or supporting process by KPIs in the dashboard. The 
surgical safety checklist is a checklist of a procedure that contains several steps that need to be 
executed before starting the surgery. At the moment this is a list that is filled out by hand. This 
process could however be simplified by using the HIS. First, each task in the process is 
delineated and implemented in the HIS using BPMN. Second, important real-time and process 
data reflecting the quality of data registration is linked to the KPIs.. A BPMN-task can or should 
be performed per step. Second, several quality indicators can be coupled to the process—like 
verification (Has the list been checked by somebody else?), completeness (Have all tasks been 
performed? Has every question on the form been filled out?), and consistency (Are there 
mistakes in the form?). All this performance information is reflected in one KPI, the surgical 
safety checklist. However, using the drill-down capabilities of the dashboard, a manager can 
trace certain underlying irregularities. Drilling down helps to explore the details of a selected 
KPI to track down problems in a process [33]. Another advantage of this approach is that the 
tasks—in this case, to answer questions—can be made mandatory. If the surgical safety 
checklist is coupled to the IT-system in the OR, users can be obliged to fill in certain forms 
before the next screen is presented. This approach increases the reliability and response rate of 
17 
 
the surgical safety checklist, leading to fewer mistakes and improved quality of care. Since 
standardized procedures following evidence-based guidelines like the surgical safety checklist 
and preoperative procedures are gaining importance in healthcare quality measurement, this 
solution will assist professionals in executing these guidelines. The direct and indirect costs of 
surgery and materials can also be outlined using this approach by coupling costs to the different 
tasks performed in the BPMN tool. Hence, the process cost of each step in the process can be 
taken into account.  
An additional function of the dashboard is simulation [34]. Simulation methods make it 
possible to explore whether process changes will result in a return on investment. The BPMN-
tool can be applied to design a possible process change. Using simulated data, the impact of the 
hypothetical process changes can be investigated by analyzing process-oriented KPIs such as 
waiting time before surgery, duration of surgery, and the occupancy of an OR. Bottlenecks can 
be tracked down [35] and problems can be discovered and predicted. Consequently, the 
dashboard becomes a very interesting working tool for the hospital. We can conclude that 
different approaches should be applied to incorporate KPIs into dashboards.  
 
Discussion 
As hospitals attempt to shift from functional to process-oriented organizational forms, process-
oriented performance measurement systems gain importance. This paper contributes to the 
development of a methodology to improve process-oriented performance measurement using 
an illustrative case study of hip surgery in the ORs of two hospitals. The methodology (Fig. 1) 
enhances process-oriented performance measurement in healthcare.  
First, important KPIs were identified. Different stakeholders were investigated to obtain a 
consensus on views on performance, studying measures of patient and supporting flows. Our 
18 
 
analysis shows that participants selected indicators that measure both supporting and patient 
flows. Discrepancies were shown between the two hospitals and different disciplines. These 
results are in line with those of Cardinaels and Soderstrom [36], who state that each stakeholder 
uses a set of diverse criteria and standards to evaluate the legitimacy of the organization [37]. 
This methodology enables healthcare managers to focus on measurements and goals that are 
important for their hospital.  
Second, processes were described and studied to link process-oriented data from information 
systems to KPIs using a bottom-up approach. This step provides in-depth information on 
existing processes and process data available within the healthcare setting. We found that most 
supporting flows were not steered by the patient flow, although poor patient flow management 
is related to a series of problems that are typically related to support flows, like supply 
shortages, resource waste, and low productivity level [38]. Mapping the different flows through 
the hospital gives an in-depth process view and creates possibilities of more process-oriented 
data collection. 
Third, the available data and possible approaches were investigated to integrate data from the 
HIS into the dashboard. This is crucial for the alignment of the demand side with the supply 
side. In this paper, we outlined different approaches. Besides the more straightforward approach 
of feeding HIS data into the dashboard, we proposed the use of BPMN as a new approach in a 
healthcare setting to integrate data into the dashboard. On top of this, we showed the importance 
of simulation. Using BPMN has several advantages [39]: we were able to link overall business 
goals with the objectives for each task, process, and subprocess. Automated data-collection 
using BPMN increases the advantages of implementing a process-oriented dashboard in a 
hospital setting. However, qualitative data like perceived satisfaction are difficult to incorporate 
into dashboards. Analyzing the unstructured qualitative data using computational techniques 
(e.g., natural language processing to extract medical concepts from free-text documents) 
19 
 
permits finer automated data acquisition. Future research should investigate how to incorporate 
qualitative data [40].  
 
Limitations 
Although this methodology improves the development and implementation of a comprehensive 
process-oriented performance measurement system taking into account patient, logistic, and 
information flows, it still has some shortcomings. KPIs related to the perception-based 
measurement of performance, like satisfaction (e.g. employee satisfaction, patient satisfaction, 
and PROMs), were considered by the focus group as important to include in a dashboard. 
However, we did not find a method to do this in an automated way. IT implementation is not 
problematic, but the methodology to gather this kind of information is.  
Another limitation of the study is that the methodology has been only partly tested. An overall 
real-time dashboard has not yet been implemented in a hospital setting. However, the 
methodology has been implemented and partially tested. First, a demonstrator was developed 
for the project. Second, an IT-integrator implemented the BPMN-procedure for filling in the 
surgical safety checklist. Third, the alignment between patient flow and supporting flows was 
optimized for the blood transfusion process at the ER using this methodology, but no dashboard 
was developed.  
 
Conclusion 
The major contributions of the proposed methodology are the facts that the goals of hospital 
management and various stakeholders are linked to the more analytical BPMN and HIS data, 
and that our three-step methodology enhances process-oriented performance measurement and 
management. The integration and visualization of the hospital goals with the HIS and process 
20 
 
data enables hospital managers to implement process-oriented performance measurement. In 
this way, this work contributes to hospital managers’ quest for more process-oriented decision-
making.  
21 
 
Declaration of interest: The authors report no conflict of interest. The authors alone are 
responsible for the content and writing the paper.  
 
Acknowledgement 
This paper is a part of the HIPS project, cofunded by iMinds, a digital research institute founded 
by the Flemish Government. The project partners are AZ Maria Middelares, AZ Nikolaas, 
Amaron, Auxcis, and H. Essers, and project support was provided by IWT. 
 
References 
[1]Vera A, Kuntz L. Process-based organization design and hospital efficiency. Health Care 
Manage R. 2007;32:55–65. 
[2] Kohlbacher M. The effects of process orientation: A literature review. Bus Process Manag 
J. 2010;16:135–52. 
[3] Vissers J, Beech R. Health operations management: basic concepts and approaches. In: 
Vissers J, Beech R, editors. Health Operations Management: Patient Flow Logistics in Health 
Care. New York: Routledge; 2005. p 39–51. 
[4] Gemmel P, Vandaele D, Tambeur W. Hospital Process Orientation (HPO): The 
development of a measurement tool. Total Qual Manage. 2008;19:1207–17. 
[5] Porter ME, Pabo EA, Lee TH. Redesigning primary care: A strategic vision to improve 
value by organizing around patients’ needs. Health Aff. 2013;32:516–25. 
[6] Villa S, Barbieri M, Lega F. Restructuring patient flow logistics around patient care 
needs: Implications and practicalities from three critical cases. Health Care Manag Sci. 
2009;12:155–65. 
22 
 
[7] Bohmer RMJ. Designing care: Aligning the nature and management of health care. USA: 
Harvard Business Press; 2009. 
[8] Smith M, Saunders R, Stuckhardt L, McGinnis M. Best Care at Lower Cost: The Path to 
Continuously Learning Health Care in America. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press; 2013. 
[9] Moore MH. Managing for value: Organizational strategy in for-profit, nonprofit, and 
governmental organizations. Nonprof Volunt Sec Q. 2000;29 Suppl 1:183–208. 
[10] Yigitbasioglu OM, Velcu O. A review of dashboards in performance management: 
Implications for design and research. IJAIS 2012;13:41–59. 
[11] Raghupathi W, Raghupathi V. Big data analytics in healthcare: Promise and potential. 
Health Inf Sci Syst. 2014;2:3. 
[12] Cresswell K, Sheikh A. Organizational issues in the implementation and adoption of 
health information technology innovations: An interpretative review. Int J Med Inform. 
2013;82:73–86. 
[13] Yin RK. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 5th ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage 
publications; 2013. 
[14] Denton B, Viapiano J, Vogl A. Optimization of surgery sequencing and scheduling 
decisions under uncertainty. Health Care Manag Sci. 2007;10:13–24. 
[15] Chen C. Information visualization. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Comput Stat Data 
Anal. 2010;2:387–403. 
[16] Bauer K. KPIs: The metrics that drive performance management. DM Review. 
2004;14:63–4. 
[17] Lapointe P. Timken rolls out a marketing dashboard for industrial bearing group. 
Marketing NPV. 2005;3:3–6. 
23 
 
[18] Leeflang PS, Wieringa JE, Bijmolt TH, Pauwels KH. Building models for markets. In: 
Leeflang PS, Wieringa JE, Bijmolt TH, Pauwels KH, editors. Modeling Markets. New York: 
Springer; 2015. p. 1–24. 
[19] Pauwels K, Ambler T, Clark BH, LaPointe P, Reibstein D, Skiera B, et al. Dashboards 
as a service: Why, what, how, and what research is needed? J Serv Res (US). 2009;12:175–
89. 
[20] Dumas M, La Rosa M, Mendling J, Reijers HA. Fundamentals of Business Process 
Management. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2013. 
[21] Paine KD. Using dashboard metrics to track communication. SCM. 2004;8:30–3. 
[22] Villa S, Prenestini A, Giusepi I. A framework to analyze hospital-wide patient flow 
logistics: Evidence from an Italian comparative study. Health policy. 2014;115:196–205. 
[23] Liu HC. A theoretical framework for holistic hospital management in the Japanese 
healthcare context. Health Policy. 2013;113:160–9. 
[24] Ritchie J, Lewis JN. Generalising from qualitative research. In: Ritchie J, Lewis JN, 
McNaughton Nicholls C, Ormston R, editors. Qualitative research practice: A guide for 
social science students and researchers. London: Sage; 2003. p. 263–287. 
[25] Liu HC, Itoh K. Conceptual framework for holistic dialysis management based on key 
performance indicators. Ther Apher Dial. 2013;17:532–50. 
[26] Harris R, Bridgman C, Ahmad M, Bowes L, Haley R, Saleem S, et al. Introducing care 
pathway commissioning to primary dental care: Measuring performance. Br Dent J. 
2011;211:E22. 
[27] Shohet IM. Key performance indicators for strategic healthcare facilities maintenance. J 
Constr Eng M. 2006;132:345–352. 
24 
 
[28] McGee JV. What is Strategic Performance Measurement? Boston, MA: Ernst & Young 
Center for Business Innovation; 1992.  
[29] Kinsman L, Rotter T, James E, Snow P, Willis J. What is a clinical pathway? 
Development of a definition to inform the debate. BMC Medicine. 2010;8:31. 
[30] Lim KH, Benbasat I. The effect of multimedia on perceived equivocality and perceived 
usefulness of information systems. MIS Quarterly. 2000;24:449–71. 
[31] Goodhue DL, Thompson RL. Task-technology fit and individual performance. MIS 
Quarterly. 1995;19:213–36. 
[32] Pageler NM, Longhurst CA, Wood M, Cornfield DN, Suermondt J, Sharek PJ, et al. Use 
of electronic medical record-enhanced checklist and electronic dashboard to decrease 
CLABSIs. Pediatrics. 2014;133:738–46. 
[33] Guo D, Chen J, MacEachren AM, Liao K. A visualization system for space-time and 
multivariate patterns (vis-stamp). TVCG. 2006;12:1461–74. 
[34] Barnes CD, Quiason JL, Benson C, McGuiness D. Success stories in simulation in health 
care. Proceedings of the 29th conference on Winter simulation; 1997 Dec 9-13; Atlanta. 
Washington DC: IEEE Computer Society; 1997. p 1280-85. 
[35] Webster C EHR Business Process Management: From process mining to process 
improvement to process usability. Proceedings of the Health Care Systems Process 
Improvement Conference; 2012 Feb 20; Las Vegas.  
[36] Cardinaels E, Soderstrom N. Managing in a complex world: Accounting and 
governance choices in hospitals. EAR. 2013;22:647–84. 
[37] Ludwig M, Van Merode F, Groot W. Principal agent relationships and the efficiency of 
hospitals. HEPAC. 2010;11:291–304. 
25 
 
[38] Villa S, Barbieri M, Lega F. Restructuring patient flow logistics around patient care 
needs: Implications and practicalities from three critical cases. Health Care Manag Sci. 
2009;12:155–65. 
[39] Pourshahid A, Amyot D, Chen P, Weiss M, Forster AJ. Business process monitoring 
and alignment: An approach based on the user requirements notation and business 
intelligence tools. WER. 2007; 80–91. 
[40] Murdoch TB, Detsky AS. The inevitable application of big data to health care. JAMA. 
2013;309:1351–2. 
[41] Krajewski LJ, King BE, Ritzman LP, Wong DS. Kanban, MRP, and shaping the 
manufacturing environment. Management science. 1987;33:39-57.

