Proceedings of the 2007 Winter Simulation Conference 
S. G. Henderson, B. Biller, M.-H. Hsieh, J. Shortle, J. D. Tew, and R. R. Barton, eds. 
ABSTRACT 
The IBM Supply-chain Network Optimization Workbench 
(SNOW) is a software tool that can help a company make 
strategic business decisions about the design and operation 
of its supply chain network. The tool supports supply chain 
analysis with integrated network optimization and simula-
tion capability. Mathematical programming models are 
used to first help identify some cost-effective scenarios 
from a large number of candidates. Optimization results 
are then converted to simulation models automatically for 
more detailed analysis with taking into account operational 
policies and uncertainties. The tool was applied to analyze 
both IBM’s internal supply chains and external clients’ 
supply chains. The combination of optimization and simu-
lation demonstrates great value in real business cases. 
1
INTRODUCTION 
In 2002, American companies spent $910 billion, or about 
8.7% of the United States gross domestic product (GDP), 
on business logistics systems (Shi et al. 2004), which con-
tained the warehousing, transportation costs, shipping re-
lated costs and logistic administration costs. In Singapore, 
the transportation and communication industry sector con-
tributed about 10.8% of the GDP in 2003 (Cheong 2005). 
Considering the importance and the influence of supply 
chain management (SCM), manufacturers and retailers like 
the IBM and Wal-Mart have paid great efforts to handle 
the flow of products efficiently and coordinate the man-
agement of supply chain smoothly.  
Therefore effective and efficient supply chain man-
agement has earned lots of research attentions in the lead-
ing manufacturers, distributors, and retailers. Typically, 
supply chain decisions can be categorized into three sets 
based on the horizons of their effects (Shi et al. 2004), i.e., 
strategic, tactical, and operational decisions. The strategic 
decisions focus on the long-term effects on a company and 
consider the global economic environments, e.g. supply 
chain network configuration, strategic supplier selection, 
etc. The tactical level decisions include selecting specific 
locations among all the potential ones, searching for the 
optimal allocation and transportation policies in the supply 
chain network. The tactical decisions are made once a year 
or more. The operational level decisions, such as schedul-
ing, are usually made on a daily basis to handle the detailed 
operations of a company.  
Design of a supply chain involves determination of i) 
the number and location of supply chain facilities, includ-
ing plants, distribution centers, warehouses and depots, ii) 
the transportation links and modes between facilities, and 
iii) the policies to operate a supply chain, such as inventory 
control policy, carrier loading policy etc. The first two 
types of decisions are often strategic decisions, while the 
determination of policies are more at the tactical and/or 
operational level. These decisions are often mixed together 
in the real business cases. For example, in a distribution 
network rationalization scenario, clients request for deci-
sion support on determining the number and location of 
their distribution centers (DC) across the nation. In the 
meantime, they need to set the inventory control policy for 
each DC and each SKU (stock keeping unit). An integrated 
analysis with optimization and simulation is necessary in 
this case, where optimization is used to identify a couple of 
most cost-effective network configurations from the huge 
set of candidates, and simulation is then used to evaluate 
performance of different policies for the networks identi-
fied.
In this paper, we present a software tool “IBM Supply-
chain Network Optimization Workbench” (SNOW), which 
supports integrated optimization and simulation analysis. 
IBM SNOW is a software tool that can help a company 
make strategic business decisions about the design and op-
eration of its supply chain network. Mathematical pro-
IBM SUPPLY-CHAIN NETWORK OPTIMIZATION WORKBENCH:  
AN INTEGRATED OPTIMIZATION AND SIMULATION TOOL FOR SUPPLY CHAIN DESIGN 
Hongwei Ding 
Wei Wang 
Jin Dong 
Minmin Qiu  
Changrui Ren 
IBM China Research Laboratory 
Building 19 Zhongguancun Software Park, 8 Dongbeiwang West Road, 
Haidian District, Beijing 100094, P. R. China 
1940
1-4244-1306-0/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
gramming models are used to first help identify some cost-
effective scenarios from a large number of candidates. Op-
timization results are then converted to simulation models 
automatically for more detailed analysis with taking into 
account operational policies and uncertainties. 
In the remaining part of the paper, Section 2 gives a 
brief literature review in the field of network optimization, 
simulation and simulation-based optimization. An over-
view of the tool is given in Section 3. Section 4 details the 
simulation framework employed in the tool and highlights 
some novel ideas about connecting optimization and simu-
lation. Some conclusions and perspectives are given in 
Section 5. 
2
REVIEW OF OPTIMIZATION, SIMULATION 
AND THEIR COMBINATION 
2.1
Supply Chain Network Optimization 
The supply chain network design problem have been stud-
ied in the academia for a long time. Geoffrion and Powers 
(1995) analyzed the evolution of distribution system design 
in the past twenty years before 1995. A number of ele-
ments are identified which have significantly contributed 
to the evolution of distribution systems, including the lo-
gistics functionalities, information systems, developed al-
gorithms and enterprise management systems. They also 
claimed that customer service and client requests will re-
main as the most fundamental aspects for research. 
Schmitdt (2000) present a state-of-the-art on various 
modeling and optimization approaches used for supply 
chain decision-making at strategic, tactic and operational 
levels. In addition to a review on existing models, the au-
thors pointed out that decisions of different levels interact 
with each other. For example, strategic decisions usually 
impose structural constraints on low level decisions. As 
feedback, low level decisions and corresponding opera-
tional performances should also be taken into account by 
high level decision-making. 
For supply chain optimization practitioners, one major 
obstacle is related to supply chain uncertainties and dy-
namics. The stochastic nature of supply chains makes most 
analytical models either over simplistic or computationally 
intractable.  
2.2
Supply Chain Simulation. 
As pointed out by Bagchi et al. (1998): “We have found 
that a typical strategic analysis requires a combination of 
optimization and simulation. Optimization technology such 
as linear or mixed integer programming is useful for solv-
ing well-defined mathematical problems such as ware-
house location and inventory optimization. But these prob-
lems are rigidly defined and usually have simplifying 
assumptions in their formulations. Such problems must be 
solved independently and thus in a complex supply chain 
one must decompose all of the issues into a hierarchical 
sequence of problems. At best, a hierarchical approach is 
awkward and introduces a second level of simplifying as-
sumptions. At worst, this approach may not be feasible if 
some of the problems are nonlinear or stochastic.”, opti-
mization is hardly used independently in industries. Com-
paring to optimization techniques, simulation is more suit-
able for the evaluation of complex industrial systems given 
a limited number of candidate scenarios.  
Supply Chain Analyzer (SCA) is a comprehensive tool 
for supply chain simulation. SCA is also developed by 
IBM Research, originally for IBM internal use. SCA de-
ploys a mix of simulation and optimization functions to 
model and analyze supply chain issues such as site location, 
replenishment policies, manufacturing policies, transporta-
tion policies, stocking levels, lead times, and customer ser-
vice (Bagchi et al. 1998). A simulation tool “Supply 
Solver” is presented in (Schunk and Plott 2000). The tool 
is connected with external modules and provides optimal 
solution on the production and distribution allocation prob-
lem. Supply Chain Guru, developed by Promodel Corpora-
tion, is a commercial simulation tool for supply chain de-
sign and planning, with a specific module for inventory 
planning (Supply Chain Guru 2006). 
Besides those simulation software, there are a number 
of supply chain simulation framework/library have been 
developed. Swaminathan (1998) describe a supply chain 
modeling framework in which supply chain models are 
composed from software components that represent types 
of supply chain agents, their constituent control elements, 
and their interaction protocols. Rossetti (2003) discusses 
the design, development and testing of a prototype object-
oriented framework for per-forming supply chain simula-
tion. Rossetti (2006) discusses the design and use of an ob-
ject-oriented framework for simulating multi-echelon in-
ventory systems. 
2.3
Simulation-based Optimization 
The conception of combining simulation and optimization 
is not new. A general simulation-based optimization 
method consists of an optimizer guiding the search direc-
tion and a simulation module used performance evaluation. 
Compared with mathematical programming techniques, 
simulation-based optimization methods replace the analyti-
cal objective function and constraints by one or more simu-
lation models. The decision variables are the conditions 
under which the simulation is run. Iteratively, the output of 
the simulation is used by the optimizer to provide feedback 
on the progress of the search for an optimal solution. Nev-
ertheless, the optimality of the solution found by a simula-
tion-based optimization method is often not guaranteed.  
1941
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
Many different methods have been developed in the 
literature for guiding the search direction in simulation-
based optimization. These methods include gradient-based 
approaches, response surface methodology, sample path 
optimization, etc (Fu 2002). These methods vary essen-
tially in their optimization strategies and each has its ad-
vantages and disadvantages. For example, infinitesimal 
perturbation analysis (IPA), a gradient based search 
method which estimates all gradients of the performance 
function in a single simulation run, possesses an advantage 
of computational efficiency. However, the estimators de-
rived using IPA are often biased and inconsistent (Ho and 
Cao 1991).  
According to an empirical comparison (Lacksonen 
2001) of four search algorithms (pattern search, simplex, 
simulated annealing, genetic algorithm) used for simula-
tion-based optimization, genetic algorithms showed its ca-
pability to robustly solve large problems with non-numeric 
variables, and performed well over the others in solving a 
variety of problems. A genetic algorithm based multi-
objective optimization method has been applied to facili-
tate decision-making on supplier selection problems (Ding 
et al. 2004). Paul and Chanev (1998) developed a simple 
real-coded genetic algorithm to optimizer the control pa-
rameters of a steelworks simulation model. 
3
OVERVIEW OF THE IBM SUPPLY-CHAIN 
NETWORK OPTIMIZATION WORKBENCH 
3.1
Tool Architecture 
The IBM Supply-chain Network Optimization Workbench 
is a software tool which supports integrated optimization 
and simulation analysis. Accordingly, there are two key 
models, respectively an optimization model and a simula-
tion model. As shown in the software architecture over-
view (Figure 1), the two models are connected with each 
other directly. Actually, the approach used in IBM SNOW 
is different from the simulation-based optimization meth-
ods, in which the two models are usually tightly bundled. 
More specifically, optimization and simulation are run in a 
sequential way, i.e. firstly a network optimization will be 
conducted, then the optimization result will be converted to 
a simulation model automatically for evaluation. More de-
tailed description of the connection between optimization 
model and simulation model is given in the following sec-
tion. 
Figure 1: Tool architecture overview 
In addition to the two models, the SNOW tool pro-
vides a number of graphic user interfaces to facilitate data 
input, network representation and parameter setting. Sup-
ply chain data could be input manually using the tool inter-
face, or automatically imported from Excel files or Access 
database. Moreover, a Geographic Information System 
(GIS) is integrated for graphical representation, which en-
ables a flexible and precise representation of the actual 
supply chain networks. As long as the longitude and lati-
tude of each facility is set, the whole network can be dis-
played in the map. Another advantage of using GIS for 
network display is that users could zoom into very local 
region seamlessly. Figure 2 illustrates a supply chain net-
work modeled in the SNOW tool and displayed in the GIS 
editor. 
Figure 2: Network representation in the geographic infor-
mation system 
3.2
Optimization Model 
A variety of mathematical models and methods are built in 
the SNOW tool. The key enabling component is a mixed 
integer programming model addressing multi-commodity 
facility location and network flow optimization problem. 
1942
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
Due to confidentiality, no detailed mathematical formula-
tion is provided in this paper. However, we focus on intro-
ducing the supply chain design problem addressed by the 
tool. The objective is to minimize the total supply chain 
cost, with respect to a variety of constraints. More specifi-
cally, the total cost function is composed of procurement 
cost, transportation cost, assembly cost, operation cost, fa-
cility fixed cost, facility investment cost, inventory carry-
ing cost and tax. A large number of constraints have been 
taken into account in the model, including supply capacity, 
assembly capacity, transportation capacity, single sourcing 
rule, etc. Figure 3 shows a screenshot of the data input in-
terface for the optimization model. 
Figure 3: Snapshot of the optimization data input interface 
A couple of algorithms are developed and integrated 
in the tool for problem solving, including mixed integer 
programming, linear programming, heuristics and meta-
heuristics. Two solvers are integrated in the tool for small 
and medium scale problem solving. One solver is a com-
mercial solver, called ILOG Cplex. The other is an open 
source solve, called Lp_Solve. In addition to the two built-
in generic solvers, we have also developed some hybrid al-
gorithms for large-scale network optimization. 
3.3
Implementation
The tool is implemented using Eclipse, an open-source 
platform for Java application development. More specifi-
cally, the tool is developed based on several basis provided 
by Eclipse Foundation, including Eclipse Platform (Eclipse 
2007), Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF 2007) and 
Graphical Editing Framework (GEF 2007). 
Eclipse is an open source community whose projects 
are focused on building an open development platform 
comprised of extensible frameworks, tools and runtimes 
for building, deploying and managing software across the 
lifecycle (Eclipse 2007). Eclipse Modeling Framework 
(EMF) is a modeling framework and code generation facil-
ity for building tools and other applications based on a 
structured data model. Graphical Editing Framework (GEF) 
allows developers to create a rich graphical editor from an 
existing application model. 
The whole optimization and simulation model is built 
upon EMF. User interfaces of the tool are created with 
GEF. Since the optimization and simulation model are 
quite complex, we built it with UML2. The power of EMF 
is that UML2 models can be directly translated to EMF 
model, and then the Java source code can be generated ac-
cordingly.
4
COMPONENT-BASED SIMULATION 
4.1
Simulation Model Overview 
The simulation model employed in the SNOW tool is a 
component-based simulation model. Figure 4 depicts the 
architecture of the simulation model. There is a generic 
discrete event simulation (DES) engine for event schedul-
ing and time processing. A simulation monitor is also de-
veloped to monitor the simulation process and key per-
formance indicators (KPI). Simulation report is generated 
after simulation runs with statistics information on KPIs 
like supply chain cost, order fill-rate, stock out rate, etc. 
Figure 4: Architecture of the Simulation Model 
One differentiating feature of the simulation model in 
SNOW is that the model is a multi-period model. This fea-
ture comes from the optimization model, because network 
optimization problems are usually multi-period in order to 
take into account the seasonality of demand and supply. 
Accordingly, the whole simulation horizon is split into 
multiple period. For each period, users could have a set of 
parameters, such as inventory control policy and parame-
ters, transportation lead-time. 
4.2
Supply Chain Facilities 
Four types of supply chain facilities are defined in the tool, 
respectively: Customer, Supplier, Distribution Center (DC), 
and Plant. The class diagram is shown in Figure 5. 
1943
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
Figure 5: Class diagram of supply chain facilities 
In the era of supply chain competition, decision mak-
ers usually would like to analyze the performance of a spe-
cific enterprise in a supply chain which is composed of a 
group of companies. Hence all supply chain facilities can 
be classified into two categories: external and internal. 
Customer and Supplier are used to model external facilities. 
More specifically, they represent the most down-flow and 
up-flow facilities in the supply chain respectively. DC and 
Plant are used to model internal facilities. The difference 
between them is that Plant can transform products but DC 
can not. 
More specifically, Customer represents the external 
demand source. It can be end user, retailer, or wholesaler. 
It can even be distribution center or plant of external com-
pany. Supplier represents the external supplier, which has 
no up-flow suppliers. But Supplier doesn’t always have 
unlimited inventory, supply capacity can be specified. DC 
represents internal warehouse, retailer or wholesaler. Prod-
ucts are shipped into DC from up-flow facilities, and then 
shipped out to down-flow facilities to fulfill their demands. 
Plant could be regarded as a more comprehensive DC, with 
the production capability.  
4.3
Operation Components 
As we all know, to simulate a supply chain, it requires not 
only the modeling of supply chain facilities, but also the 
modeling of operational policies in order to drive order 
flow, material flow and financial flow. Six types of com-
ponents are defined in SNOW, including Supply compo-
nent, Sourcing component, Inventory component, Trans-
portation component, Manufacturing component, and 
Finance component. Supply component and Transportation 
component deal with down-flow facilities. Sourcing com-
ponent deal with up-flow facilities. Inventory component 
and Manufacturing component deal with issues inside the 
owner facility. Finance component deals with inside and 
outside finance related issues. 
In terms of functionality of each component, Supply 
component handles incoming customer orders. Sourcing 
component generates customer orders and replenishment 
orders. Transportation component handles transportation 
tasks. It receives transportation requests, and then manages 
to ship products to down-flow facilities according to re-
quests. Inventory component holds stock of products, 
which includes raw materials and finished goods. Manu-
facturing component provides the capability of transform 
products from raw materials to finished goods. Finance 
component handles the cash flow between different facili-
ties, and also different enterprises in a supply chain. 
4.4
Connection between Optimization Model to 
Simulation Model 
The connection between optimization model and simula-
tion model has been a challenge during the research and 
development of the tool. We are still developing and inte-
grating more flexible means to enhance the connection. In 
this paper, we introduce the mechanism that has been built 
in the tool and verified in a couple of customer projects. 
The essential idea behind is that once the optimization 
result is produced by the optimizer, it is converted to a 
simulation model automatically. After the automatic con-
version is conducted, the additional simulation-specific at-
tributes are specified according to some rules, which are 
also pre-set by end user. After the simulation modeling 
phase, we conduct the simulation, get the simulation results, 
and compare them with the optimization results in order to 
validate the best solution. These steps are further elabo-
rated as follows. 
The first step is to convert network structure. The op-
timization model and simulation model both define facility 
networks. These two networks are very similar, both con-
sists of four kinds of facilities: Supplier, Plant, Distributor, 
and Customer. Hence the network structure can be trans-
formed directly. What’s more, the facilities suggested to be 
shutdown in optimization results will not be mapped to 
simulation model, and the facilities suggested to be started 
will be. 
The second step is to convert customer demands. In 
the optimization model, aggregated demand quantity are 
defined for each period and for each product. While in 
simulation model, for generating demand event, we need to 
know the quantity for each product in customer order, as 
well as the interval between orders. So we split each period 
into several segments, and the aggregate demand quantity 
are assigned to these segments with respect to some prede-
fined rules. For each segment, one customer order will be 
generated. 
The third step is to convert supplier selection policies. 
Customer orders will be sent to up-flow facilities. In the 
logistics network, each customer has several up-flow facili-
ties, which can be distributors or plants. So supplier selec-
1944
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
tions must be in place for routing these orders. The default 
supplier selection policy will forward orders to all up-flow 
facilities, but the quantity rates of orders are different. The 
optimization results contain information about the trans-
portation quantity on each route, which are used to deter-
mine the related procurement quantity. 
The fourth step is to convert product-period related at-
tributes. There is a global calendar in the optimization 
model. It assumes all periods have the same length, and all 
periods with same period index have the same start date 
and end date. Although this assumption can cover most 
cases, we are seeking more flexibilities in the simulation 
model. So all periods in the simulation model are inde-
pendent with each other and their start time and end time 
can be set freely. What’s more, in the optimization model, 
it is a facility-period-product structure, which means first 
we define the periods for each facility, and then within 
each period, we define the attributes associated with each 
product. But in the simulation model, it is a facility-
product-period structure, so for each product, we can de-
fine multiple periods, and then define attributes associated 
with the periods. 
The fifth step is to define additional attributes. The 
simulation model needs much more attributes than optimi-
zation model. So we need to define some default values for 
them, such as default intervals to check customer order 
queues, default inventory control policies, etc. The model 
with these default values can be simulated directly, but it’s 
expected for the analyst to modify them. Figure 6 demon-
strates the interface of the simulation model. 
Figure 6: Network simulation model converted from opti-
mization results 
5
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
This paper gives an overview of the software tool IBM 
Supply-chain Network Optimization Workbench (SNOW), 
developed by IBM Research. The IBM SNOW supports an 
integrated optimization and simulation analysis of supply 
chains. It has been used for the improvement of IBM’s in-
ternal supply chains and also for the optimization of out-
side clients’ supply chains. Practice demonstrate that the 
combination of simulation and optimization could help de-
cision makers gain much insights from a real supply chain 
and finally improve its efficiency and effectiveness. 
REFERENCES 
Bagchi S., S. J. Buckley, M. Ettl, and G. Lin. 1998. Ex-
perience using the IBM Supply Chain Simulator. Pro-
ceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference,
1387-1394. 
Cheong Lee Fong. 2005. New Models in Logistics Net-
work Design and Implications for 3PL Companies. 
Ph.D. Dissertation of SINGAPORE-MIT ALLIANCE. 
Ding H., L. Benyoucef and X. Xie. 2004. A multi-
objective optimization method for strategic sourcing 
and inventory replenishment. Proc. of 2004 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation,
2711-2716, New Orleans, U.S.A. 
Eclipse 2007. Available via <http://www.eclipse. 
org> [accessed March 10, 2007]. 
EMF 2007. Available via <http://www.eclipse. 
org/emf> [accessed March 10, 2007].Fu M. C.. 
2002. Optimization for simulation: Theory vs. Practice. 
INFORMS Journal on Computing 14(3): 192-215. 
GEF 2007. Available via <http://www.eclipse. 
org/gef> [accessed March 10, 2007]. 
Geoffrion A. M. and R. F. Powers. 1995. Twenty years of 
strategic distribution system design: An evolutionary 
perspective. Interfaces 25:105-128. 
Ho, Y. C. and X. R. Cao. 1991. Perturbation analysis of 
discrete event dynamic systems. Kluwers Academic 
Publishers. 
Lacksonen T. 2001. Empirical comparison of search algo-
rithms for discrete event simulation. Computers & In-
dustrial Engineering. 40:133-148. 
Manuel D. Rossetti, Mehmet Miman, Vijith Varghese, and 
Yisha Xiang. 2006. An object-oriented framework for 
simulating multi-echelon inventory systems. Winter 
Simulation Conference 2006: 1452-1461.
Paul R. J. and T. S. Chanev. 1998. Simulation optimization 
using a genetic algorithm. Simulation Practice and 
Theory, 6: 601-611. 
Rossetti, M. D. and Chan H.T. 2003. A Prototype Object-
Oriented Supply Chain Simulation Framework. Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference,
1612-1620. 
Schunk D. and B. Plott. 2000. Using Simulation to Ana-
lyze Supply Chains. Proceedings of the 2000 Winter 
Simulation Conference, 1095-1100. 
Shi L., R. R. Meyer, M. Bozbay, and A. J. Miller. 2004. A 
nested partitions framework for solving large-scale 
multicommodity facility location problem. Journal of 
1945
Ding, Wang, Dong, Qiu and Ren 
Systems Science and Systems Engineering 13(2): 158-
179. 
Supply Chain Guru. 2006. Available via <http://
www.llamasoft.com/guru.html> 
[accessed 
May 16, 2006]. 
Swaminathan, J. M., Smith, S. F. and Sadeh, N. M. 1998. 
Modeling Supply Chain Dynamics: A Multiagent Ap-
proach.  Decision Science 29(3): 607-632. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
HONGWEI DING is a Researcher at IBM China Re-
search Laboratory. He received his Ph.D. in Automation 
from INRIA (French National Institute of Computer Sci-
ence & Control), France. Before joined IBM, he was a re-
searcher at INRIA. His research interests include supply 
chain modeling, optimization and simulation. His e-mail 
address is <dinghw@cn.ibm.com>.
WEI WANG is a Researcher at IBM China Research 
Laboratory. He joined IBM Research in 2005 after receiv-
ing his master degree in Control Science and Engineering 
from Tsinghua University in Beijing, P. R. China. Cur-
rently, his research interests include supply chain simula-
tion and optimization, performance management, and busi-
ness process management. His e-mail address is 
<wangwcrl@cn.ibm.com>.
JIN DONG, Manager of Supply Chain Management and 
Logistics Research in IBM China Research Laboratory. He 
received his Ph.D. degree in Tsinghua University from P.R. 
China in 2001. Before joined IBM, he was the Research 
Assistant Professor in Industrial Engineering Department 
of Arizona State University in USA. His e-mail address is 
<dongjin@cn.ibm.com>.
MINMIN QIU is a Researcher at IBM China Research 
Laboratory. He joined IBM Research in 2006 after receiv-
ing his Ph.D. degree in Industrial Engineering from 
Tsinghua University in Beijing, P.R. China. His research 
interests include inventory optimization, machine learning, 
supply chain optimization and simulation. His e-mail ad-
dress is <qiumm@cn.ibm.com>.
CHANGRUI REN is a Researcher at IBM China Re-
search Laboratory. He joined IBM Research in 2005 after 
receiving his Ph.D. degree in Control Science and Engi-
neering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, P. R. China. 
His research interests include supply chain management, 
logistics network design, performance management, and 
business process management. He is currently working on 
an end-to-end supply chain transformation methodology 
and tool. His e-mail address is <rencr@cn.ibm.com>.
1946

