On the Design of
IT Key Performance Indicators
Dirk Draheim
IT Service Management Division
University of Innsbruck
Innsbruck, Austria
draheim@acm.org
Abstract—Today’s successful IT service providers need to
continuously improve the transparency of their service provi-
sion. The selection and negotiation of key performance indica-
tors is an important component in establishing transparency.
In this workshop contribution we aim at characterizing the
role of key performance indicators in management system, in
general, and IT service management systems, in particular.
We discuss the theoretical background of process-oriented
quality management systems, i.e., the management school of
cybernetic feedback-control systems. We express our opinion
that a purely mechanical application of quality management
systems comes at the risk of misunderstanding or overlooking
important parts of the functioning of a successful enterprise.
Against the background of these ﬁndings we can understand
mainstream IT governance and IT service management systems
as process-oriented quality management systems. As part of
the discussion, we reconsider the mainstream IT planning
instruments of total cost of ownership and total economic
impact and extend them by a means to incorporate probabilistic
risk assessment.
Keywords-ISO 9000, ISO 20000, ISO 38500, ISO 42010,
CoBit, ITIL, IT service management, IT governance, quality
management systems, cybernetic management, key perfor-
mance indicators
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s successful IT service providers need to continu-
ously improve the transparency of their service provision.
For external IT providers, this is required by customers.
For internal IT providers, e.g., the enterprise’s IT service
management division, it is required by the enterprises IT
governance stakeholders. Transparency of IT services is a
buzzword that we can hear in many IT service management
initiatives, as well as in smaller and larger IT sourcing
debates in today’s companies. More concrete objectives that
are addressed by such initiatives and debates are reliability of
services, cost calculability and cost predictability, ﬂexibility
of the IT infrastructure and the strategic alignment of the
emerging future IT infrastructure with the business goals of
the enterprise.
The selection of appropriate performance indicators and
their negotiation among stakeholders are important compo-
nents in establishing transparency in IT service management.
In practice we have experienced that stakeholders concen-
trate and rely too much on the deﬁnition of key performance
indicators. We believe that performance indicators are no
silver bullet in IT service management. And so they are
not for quality management in general. In this workshop
paper we discuss the role of key performance indicators.
We do so by attempting to characterize the design space for
management systems that are based on a notion of target
negotiation.
II. QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Today’s quality management systems are feedback control
systems. A feedback control system consists out of an inner
system that is controlled, a sensor or measurement function
that observes the controlled system and a controller or
steering function that adjusts the behavior of the system on
the basis of measurement data. The interplay of the system,
its sensor and its controller is also called a feedback control
loop.
The plan-do-check-act cycle (PDCA), see Fig. 1 also
known as Deming wheel [4] or Shewart cycle, is the
established terminology for the feedback control loop in the
discipline of quality management systems. The planning and
acting stages correspond to the steering function, the doing
stage corresponds to the controlled system and the checking
stage corresponds to the measurement function.
The notion of feedback control system is a very general
one. Quality management systems have certain characteris-
tics that make them special feedback control systems:
∙Discrete. The planning stage identiﬁes and negotiates
objectives for the processes controlled by the quality
management life-cycle. It occurs from time to time,
e.g., on an annual basis or a monthly basis. Further
monitoring and reaction at ﬁner granularity is done by
the responsible stakeholder of the process.
∙Evolving. A mature – or let us say viable – quality
management system is itself the subject to controlled
change and therefore evolves in conjunction with the
business that it aims to improve. This means that the
action and planning stage change the process. They
also change the objectives and the indicators that are
monitored.
2011 22nd International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications
1529-4188/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/DEXA.2011.59
9
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
PLAN
objectives
are
fixed
processes
are
run
DO
objectives
are
monitored
CHECK
ACT
improvements
are
made
Figure 1.
PDCA-like business process management life cycle
∙Process-oriented. Established quality management sys-
tems [8], [9] are process-oriented. For conformance
with concrete quality management systems the deﬁni-
tion of processes is crucial.
A quality management system can be established in
parallel to an existing management system. A quality man-
agement system can become so pervasive in an enterprise
that it actually becomes the management model of the en-
terprise. Cybernetic management models are very elaborated
feedback control systems [1], [2], [3]. The feedback control
systems of cybernetic management are recursive, i.e., the
same steering principle is repeated at the several levels of
the enterprise.
ITIL (IT Infrastructure Library) [19], [20] is the IT service
management body of knowledge. As such it emerged as a
collection of best practices in IT service management. The
standard corresponding to ITIL is ISO 20000 [10]. Over the
years more and more elements of IT governance emerged
in ITIL so that it now spans both IT governance and IT
service management. However, still it is perceived rather
as an IT service management framework and in projects
it is introduced as an IT service management tool in ﬁrst
place, usually starting with establishment of a robust incident
management process. ISO 38500 [11] and CoBit [12], [13]
emerged as IT governance frameworks. In particular, CoBit
also operates on the level of IT service management, how-
ever, usually CoBit is perceives as a genuine IT governance
tool. Actually, you may ﬁnd enterprises in which ISO
385000 or CoBit are used in parallel with ISO 20000 or
ITIL.
The IT governance viewpoint onto IT management initia-
tives is always a quality management viewpoint and all the
arguments given in Sect. III fully apply to IT management
scenarios.
III. DESCRIBING AND MEASURING OBJECTIVES
The identiﬁcation of objectives of processes and negoti-
ation of targets is crucial for quality management. Against
the more basic viewpoint of agent theory [15] it is a center
pillar of management in general.
Objectives and targets can be described by several means:
∙Steering parameters. The steering parameters are target
agreements between stakeholders of the steering func-
tion and stakeholders of the process execution function.
A steering parameter is a well-deﬁned, measurable
ﬁgure of a deﬁned business process.
∙Informal target agreements. Informal target agreements
are further target agreements that cannot be deﬁned
as measurable ﬁgures in terms of deﬁned business
processes.
∙Additional business improvement activities. The busi-
ness improvement activities are all kinds of activities
other than target agreements that are intended to im-
prove the efﬁciency or effectiveness of the enterprise.
The distinction between informal target agreements and
additional business improvement activities is somehow arti-
ﬁcial. However, we think that it is important to distinguish
between those target agreements that can be expressed in
terms of the objectives of the processes, on the one hand
side, and those that address other dimensions of business
improvement, e.g., the organizational structure or the devel-
opment and training of staff. For the former notion we use
the term informal target agreements and the term additional
improvement activities for the latter. The listed means of
objectives and targets is not complete and rather loose. For
example, also the formal steering parameters can be reﬁned
to those that are directly related to the process outcome and
those that are related to other activities that inﬂuence the
outcome of processes and services indirectly.
Similarly, achievements can be assessed by several means:
∙Key performance indicators. The key performance in-
dicators are measurable ﬁgures about deﬁned business
processes. Performance indicators correspond to steer-
ing parameters.
∙Informal performance reports. The performance reports
are further information about the performance of the
enterprise that cannot be deﬁned as measurable ﬁgures
in terms of deﬁned business processes. Informal perfor-
mance reports correspond to informal target agreements
and additional business improvement activities.
On the basis of this, we now want to distinguish between
three different kinds of viewpoints on management systems,
in general, and quality management systems and IT service
management systems, in particular:
∙Knowledge management viewpoint. The knowledge
management viewpoint understands the existence of
informal processes that accompany the formalizable
10
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
processes in an enterprise. It cares for the externaliza-
tion of knowledge and its distribution [18], [6].
∙Objective viewpoint. We call a viewpoint that tries to
understand as much of the functioning of an enterprise
as possible in terms of steering parameters, informal
target agreements, key performance indicators and per-
formance reports as objective viewpoint.
∙Mechanical viewpoint. We call a viewpoint that tries
to understand the functioning of an enterprise merely
in terms of steering parameters, informal target agree-
ments, key performance indicators and performance
reports as mechanical viewpoint.
∙Purely mechanical viewpoint. We call a viewpoint that
tries to understand as much of the functioning of
an enterprise merely in terms of steering parameters
and key performance indicators as purely mechanical
viewpoint.
The difference between an objective viewpoint and me-
chanical viewpoint lays in the role granted to the deﬁnition
of objectives. In an objective viewpoint the deﬁnition of
objectives is considered a crucial element, but in an me-
chanical viewpoint the deﬁnition of objectives rules. An
objective viewpoint is aware of the importance of the quality
of the overall design of the management system and its
components. It is also aware of the impact of auxiliary
management functions the quality. The balanced scorecard
approach [14] is example of an approach that is shows such
awareness in the way it taught and applied in projects in
practice.
Against the background of this discussion, we eventually
come up with the following statement:
The gap between a mechanical or even purely
mechanical viewpoint and the actual functioning
of the enterprise should not be neglected in
quality management system projects. The parts
of the functioning of the enterprise that are not
amenable to a mechanical viewpoint may con-
tribute substantially to the targeted results and
the success of the enterprise.
From the above discussion we conclude that IT service
provision, see Fig. 2, with all its facets of incident man-
agement, problem management, service speciﬁcation and
service control needs an objective viewpoint that should
ideally combined with a knowledge management viewpoint.
IV. ON THE ASSESSMENT OF IT ASSETS
Several objectives must be met to make a successful and
stable system: performance, scalability, availability, security,
maintainability. If information system products have to be
selected, eventually, total cost of ownership (TCO) [16] must
be addressed.
Service
Release
Relationship
Management
Incident & Problem
Resolution
Control
Service Delivery
Figure 2.
IT service management issues according to ISO 20000.
A. Total Cost of Ownership
The total cost of ownership comprises costs for hardware
and software, costs of the rollout project and costs for system
maintenance and system administration. Therefore the total
costs of ownership are always calculated for an assumed
lifetime of the considered information system – it is simply
not enough to consider the initial purchase costs of an in-
formation system. The costs for system operations including
costs for system maintenance and system administration
are hard to predict and sometimes even hard to determine
once the system is running. So, in advance, costs of an
information system sometimes can only be estimated rather
than calculated. This is even more true if risk management
aspects come into play. Then the above deﬁnition of total
costs of ownership is not completely adequate any more.
This problem arises for all of the aforementioned driving
forces affecting system stability. For example, with respect
to availability you have to estimate the costs of system
downtime; or with respect to security you have to estimate
the costs of the case that somebody infringes your system.
From these estimates you must then derive how much
more you are willing to pay for extra availability and extra
security.
Formally, e.g., by the Gartner Group, there is a distinction
between so-called direct and indirect costs. Direct costs are
budgeted expenses, indirect costs are unbudgeted expenses.
Unbudgeted expenses are those that are unforeseen or over-
looked. They can stem from technological risks or from
expenses hidden in overlooked cost units, residing, e.g., in
cost centers other then the IT department. In this termi-
nology, typical examples of indirect costs are expenses for
end user training and support. Indirect costs can in principle
often be made direct costs by estimating them and making
them explicit by assigning them to an appropriate cost unit
connected to the considered information technology.
Only a holistic treatment of software, middleware,
database management systems, hardware, and system ad-
ministration can balance the several driving forces. In such
a holistic treatment of information systems the database
technology viewpoint on them has always proven to be a
particular mature one in the past – both in practice and in
research.
11
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
B. Total Beneﬁt of IT Ownership
Care must be taken in analyses that are done to understand
whether a certain IT strategy should be taken or a certain
IT infrastructure should be created. Estimations of the total
cost of ownership address only the cost side of these even
more complicated analyses. Return on investment (ROI) is
the widely used term in proﬁt/loss calculations. Formally, it
is the ratio of expected proﬁt to needed capital. In practice,
return on investment calculations are done on different levels
of observation, i.e., ﬁnancing of a businesses, business units,
projects, or technical equipment, e.g., new IT infrastructure.
However, with respect to information technology even the
viewpoint of return on investment calculations with their
focus on measurable cash ﬂow is often to narrow to re-
alistically evaluate the beneﬁts of an optional investment.
New opportunities and additional ﬂexibility created by a new
IT infrastructure are yet other criteria that often have to be
considered. An example of an approach that addresses the
real beneﬁts of an IT investment is Forrester Research’s Total
Economic Impact (TEI) method [17], which considers total
costs of ownership, the business value and the options that
are created by IT in evaluating it.
C. Assessment of the Total Impact of IT Ownership
As we said in Sect. IV-A, indirect costs belong to the total
cost of ownership. And actually, in practice stakeholders
usually incorporate indirect costs in realistic calculations.
The indirect costs that deal with risks of malfunction of
information technology, i.e., unplanned down times or se-
curity threats can be estimated. However, even if the costs
of a single malfunction can be robustly estimated there is
another level of indirection, i.e., the problem of estimating
the probability of such malfunctions. So, if done correctly
there is in general at least a worst case and a best case
calculation of total cost of ownership; ideally, the outcome
of the total cost of ownership analysis is actually deviation
of costs.
The problem of mixing certain costs with probabilistic
costs in total costs of ownership is that it opens the door
for obfuscation of the certain costs. Therefore, we propose
a different viewpoint depicted in Fig. 3. Here, the total
cost of ownership consists of certain measurable, budgeted
costs only. All probabilistic costs – usually indirect costs of
uncertain malfunction events but also all other probabilistic
costs – are considered separately from the total cost of
ownership. The probabilistic costs are considered on the side
of the anyhow vague determination of the total beneﬁt of
ownership. Some of the beneﬁts of information technology
can only be roughly measured or cannot be measured at
all. They are often nonetheless important. So it is the case
for, e.g., an improved customer relationship on behalf of
improved customer processes and also for an improved
overall ﬂexibility of the enterprise gained by IT. Further-
more, the total beneﬁt of ownership is made of assessable
Total Impact
of IT Ownership
Total Cost
of Ownership
Total Benefit
of Ownership
Hardware
Costs
Software
Costs
Operations
Costs
Cost
Savings
Profit
Quality
of Service
Availability
Scalability
Security
Probabilistic
Costs
Auxiliary
Benefits
Figure 3.
Total impact of IT ownership.
proﬁt and cost savings, which are two sides of the same
story. Usually, in the area of business process optimization
information technology is considered to contribute to cost
savings, if information technology is the core asset in a new
project or production line its contribution to the proﬁt can be
determined. Cost savings and proﬁt together make up a kind
of direct, absolute return on investment which is lowered by
the probabilistic costs in our model.
Now, we want to consider the notion of total impact
of IT ownership for the areas of business process reengi-
neering [7] and management [5] which can be mutual
dependent as discussed in the introductory section of this
chapter. Business process reengineering and management
lead to better performance and therefore have their impact.
Often, the impacts are directly measurable in terms of cost
savings or time savings. Often, the impacts are not as easily
to determine. Information technology can be used as an
enabler of business process reengineering and management.
Now, there are two possible views on the total cost of
ownership calculation for the supporting IT. The ﬁrst one
sees the decision for the optimizations independently from
the decision for a concrete IT support. Then, consequentially
the estimated impacts cannot be incorporated into the total
cost of ownership calculation. This case usually occurs when
a certain kind of optimization is already standard in the sense
of strategic benchmarking, i.e., there is no doubt that the
enterprise will beneﬁt from the possible changes and the
choice of technology boils down to the evaluation of existing
products. However, if innovative optimizations that need new
comparatively high cost technology have to be evaluated, it
is very likely to make sense that the estimated impacts are
included into the total cost of ownership calculations.
12
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
V. CONCLUSION
A mature quality management system consists of two mu-
tual dependent functions, i.e., a steering function and a pro-
cess execution function. The steering function analyzes the
performance of the enterprise. It analyzes the environment of
the enterprise. It analyzes and adjusts the strategy [21] of the
enterprise. It analyzes the key performance indicators and
additional performance reports. It reviews the functioning
of the business process execution function. As a result of
this, it resets the steering parameters, negotiates further tar-
get agreements and instructs further business improvement
activities. Furthermore, it continuously improves the steering
interface and the feedback interface.
Against the background of quality management we have
distinguished between a knowledge management viewpoint,
an objective viewpoint, a mechanical viewpoint and a purely
mechanical viewpoint onto management systems. We have
identiﬁed the need of an objective viewpoint, ideally com-
bined with a knowledge management viewpoint, for success-
ful IT service management initiatives.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Beer. Fanfare for Effective Management – Cybernetic Praxis
in Government. The 3𝑟𝑑Richard Goodman Memorial Lecture,
Delivered at Brighton Polytechnic, Moulsecoomb, Brighton,
14𝑡ℎFebruary 1973.
[2] S. Beer. The Heart of Enterprise – Companion Volume to: The
Brain of the Firm. John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[3] S. Beer. The Brain of the Firm – Companion Volume to:The
Heart of Enterprise. John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[4] W. E. Deming. Out of the Crisis. MIT, Center for Advanced
Educational Services, 1982.
[5] D. Draheim. Business Process Technology – A Uniﬁed View
on Business Processes, Workﬂows and Enterprise Applications.
Springer, 2010.
[6] D. Draheim. Smart Business Process Management. In (Layna
Fisher, Herausgeber): 2011 BPM and Workﬂow Handbook,
Digital Edition. Future Strategies, Workﬂow Management
Coalition, 2011.
[7] M. Hammer, J. Champy. Reengineering the Corporation: A
Manifesto for Business Revolution. HarperCollins Publishers,
1993.
[8] International Organization for Standardization. International
Standard ISO 9000:2005(E). Quality Management Systems –
Fundamentals and Vocabulary. ISO, 2005.
[9] International Organization for Standardization. International
Standard ISO 9000:2005(E). Quality Management Systems –
Guidelines for Performance Improvements. ISO, 2000.
[10] International Organization for Standardization. International
Standard ISO/IEC 20000-1:2005(E). Information Technology
– Service Management – Part 1: Speciﬁcation. International
Organization for Standardization, 2005.
[11] International Organization for Standardization. International
Standard ISO/IEC 38500:2008. Corporate Governance of In-
formation Technology. ISO, 2008.
[12] IT Governance Institute. COBIT 4.1 – Framework, Control
Objectives, Management Guidelines, Maturity Models. ISBN
1-933284-72-2, IT Governance Institute, 2007.
[13] IT Governance Institute. COBIT Quickstart, IT Governance
Institute, 2007.
[14] R.S. Kaplan, D.P. Norton. The Balanced Scorecard: Trans-
lating Strategy into Action. Harvard Business School Press,
1996.
[15] M. Jensen, W. Meckling. Theory of the Firm – Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure. In: Journal
of Financial Economics, vol. 3, no. 4, 1976, pp. 305–360.
[16] B. Kirwin. CIO Update: To Control TCO, It Must Be Mea-
sured and Managed. ID Number IGG-04162003-02. Gartner
Group, April 2003.
[17] D. Merriman. Total Economic Impact: Really Understanding
the IT Cost/Beneﬁt Equation. Giga Information Group, 2003.
[18] I. Nonaka. The Knowledge-Creating Company. Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 2008.
[19] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce. ICT Infrastructure Man-
agement. Bernan, 2002.
[20] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce. Ofﬁcial Introduction to the
ITIL Service Lifecycle. Stationery Ofﬁce Books, August 2007.
[21] C.W. Stern, M. S. Deimler. The Boston Consulting Group
on Strategy: Classic Concepts and New Perspectives. Wiley &
Sons, June 2006.
13
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO GRANDE DO SUL. Downloaded on July 06,2025 at 18:18:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

